neously. Some individuals write excessive letters, e-mails, text messages, and so forth, on
many different topics to friends, public figures, or the media.
    The increased activity criterion can be difficult to ascertain in children; however, when
the child takes on many tasks simultaneously, starts devising elaborate and unrealistic
plans for projects, develops previously absent and developmentally inappropriate sexual
preoccupations (not accounted for by sexual abuse or exposure to sexually explicit mate­
rial), then Criterion B might be met based on clinical judgment. It is essential to determine
whether the behavior represents a change from the child's baseline behavior; occurs most
of the day, nearly every day for the requisite time period; and occurs in temporal associa­
tion with other symptoms of mania.
    The expansive mood, excessive optimism, grandiosity, and poor judgment often lead
to reckless involvement in activities such as spending sprees, giving away possessions,
reckless driving, foolish business investments, and sexual promiscuity that is unusual for
the individual, even though these activities are likely to have catastrophic consequences
(Criterion B7). The individual may purchase many unneeded items without the money to
pay for them and^ in some cases, give them away. Sexual behavior may include infidelity
or indiscriminate sexual encounters with strangers, often disregarding the risk of sexually
transmitted diseases or interpersonal consequences.
    The manic episode must result in marked impairment in social or occupational func­
tioning or require hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others (e.g., financial losses, il­
legal activities, loss of employment, self-injurious behavior). By definition, the presence of
psychotic features during a manic episode also satisfies Criterion C.
    Manic symptoms or syndromes that are attributable to the physiological effects of a
drug of abuse (e.g., in the context of cocaine or amphetamine intoxication), the side effects
of medications or treatments (e.g., steroids, L-dopa, antidepressants, stimulants), or an­
other medical condition do not count toward the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. However,
a fully syndromal manic episode that arises during treatment (e.g., with medications, elec-
troconvulsive therapy, light therapy) or drug use and persists beyond the physiological ef­
fect of the inducing agent (i.e., after a medication is fully out of the individual's system or
the effects of electroconvulsive therapy would be expected to have dissipated completely)
is sufficient evidence for a manic episode diagnosis (Criterion D). Caution is indicated so
that one or two symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation follow­
ing antidepressant use) are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a manic or hypomanie
episode, nor necessarily an indication of a bipolar disorder diathesis. It is necessary to
meet criteria for a manic episode to make a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, but it is not re­
quired to have hypomanie or major depressive episodes. However, they may precede or
follow a manic episode. Full descriptions of the diagnostic features of a hypomanie epi­
sode may be found within the text for bipolar II disorder, and the features of a major de­
pressive episode are described within the text for major depressive disorder.


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
E>uring a manic episode, individuals often do not perceive that they are ill or in need of treat­
ment and vehemently resist efforts to be treated. Individuals may change their dress, makeup,
or personal appearance to a more sexually suggestive or flamboyant style. Some perceive a
sharper sense of smell, hearing, or vision. Gambling and antisocial behaviors may accompany
the manic episode. Some individuals may become hostile and physically threatening to others
and, when delusional, may become physically assaultive or suicidal. Catastrophic conse­
quences of a manic episode (e.g., involuntary hospitalization, difficulties with the law, serious
financial difficulties) often result from poor judgment, loss of insight, and hyperactivity.
    Mood may shift very rapidly to anger or depression. Depressive symptoms may occur
during a manic episode and, if present, may last moments, hours, or, more rarely, days (see
"with mixed features" specifier, pp. 149-150).
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence estimate in the continental United States was 0.6% for bipolar I
disorder as defined in DSM-IV. Twelve-month prevalence of bipolar I disorder across 11
countries ranged from 0.0% to 0.6%. The lifetime male-to-female prevalence ratio is ap­
proximately 1.1:1.

Development and Course
Mean age at onset of the first manic, hypomanie, or major depressive episode is approxi­
mately 18 years for bipolar I disorder. Special considerations are necessary to detect the di­
agnosis in children. Since children of the same chronological age may be at different
developmental stages, it is difficult to define with precision what is ''normal" or "ex­
pected" at any given point. Therefore, each child should be judged according to his or her
own baseline. Onset occurs throughout the life cycle, including first onsets in the 60s or
70s. Onset of manic symptoms (e.g., sexual or social disinhibition) in late mid-life or late-
life should prompt consideration of medical conditions (e.g., frontotemporal neurocogni-
tive disorder) and of substance ingestion or withdrawal.
     More than 90% of individuals who have a single manic episode go on to have recurrent
mood episodes. Approximately 60% of manic episodes occur immediately before a major
depressive episode. Individuals with bipolar I disorder who have multiple (four or more)
mood episodes (major depressive, manic, or hypomanie) within 1 year receive the speci­
fier "with rapid cycling."

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Bipolar disorder is more common in high-income than in low-income
countries (1.4 vs. 0.7%). Separated, divorced, or widowed individuals have higher rates of
bipolar I disorder than do individuals who are married or have never been married, but
the direction of the association is unclear.
Genetic and physiological. A family history of bipolar disorder is one of the strongest and
most consistent risk factors for bipolar disorders. There is an average 10-fold increased risk
among adult relatives of individuals with bipolar I and bipolar II disorders. Magnitude of
risk increases with degree of kinship. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder likely share a ge­
netic origin, reflected in familial co-aggregation of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Course modifiers. After an individual has a manic episode with psychotic features, subse­
quent manic episodes are more likely to include psychotic features. Incomplete inter­
episode recovery is more common when the current episode is accompanied by mood-
incongruent psychotic features.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Little information exists on specific cultural differences in the expression of bipolar I dis­
order. One possible explanation for this may be that diagnostic instruments are often
translated and applied in different cultures with no transcultural validation. In one U.S.
study, 12-month prevalence of bipolar I disorder was significantly lower for Afro-Carib-
beans than for African Americans or whites.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Females are more likely to experience rapid cycling and mixed states, and to have patterns of
comorbidity that differ from those of males, including higher rates of lifetime eating disor­
ders. Females with bipolar I or II disorder are more likely to experience depressive symptoms
than males. They also have a higher lifetime risk of alcohol use disorder than are males and a
much greater likelihood of alcohol use disorder than do females in the general population.
Suicide Risk
The lifetime risk of suicide in individuals with bipolar disorder is estimated to be at least
15 times that of the general population. In fact, bipolar disorder may account for one-quar­
ter of all completed suicides. A past history of suicide attempt and percent days spent de­
pressed in the past year are associated with greater risk of suicide attempts or completions.

Functional Consequences of Bipoiar I Disorder
Although many individuals with bipolar disorder return to a fully functional level be­
tween episodes, approximately 30% show severe impairment in work role function. Func­
tional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms, especially with respect
to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent lev­
els of education when compared with the general population. Individuals with bipolar I
disorder perform more poorly than healthy individuals on cognitive tests. Cognitive im­
pairments may contribute to vocational and interpersonal difficulties and persist through
the lifespan, evex^ during euthymie periods.

Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. Major depressive disorder may also be accompanied by hy­
pomanie or manic symptoms (i.e., fewer symptoms or for a shorter duration than required
for mania or hypomania). When the individual presents in an episode of major depression,
one must depend on corroborating history regarding past episodes of mania or hypoma­
nia. Symptoms of irritability may be associated with either major depressive disorder or
bipolar disorder, adding to diagnostic complexity.
Other bipolar disorders. Diagnosis of bipolar I disorder is differentiated from bipolar II
disorder by determining whether there have been any past episodes of mania. Other spec­
ified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders should be differentiated from bipolar I
and II disorders by considering whether either the episodes involving manic or hypo-
manic symptoms or the episodes of depressive symptoms fail to meet the full criteria for
those conditions.
    Bipolar disorder due to another medical condition may be distinguished from bipolar
I and II disorders by identifying, based on best clinical evidence, a causally related medical
condition.
Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, or other
anxiety disorders. These disorders need to be considered in the differential diagnosis as
either the primary disorder or, in some cases, a comorbid disorder. A careful history of
symptoms is needed to differentiate generalized anxiety disorder from bipolar disorder,
as anxious ruminations may be mistaken for racing thoughts, and efforts to minimize anx­
ious feelings may be taken as impulsive behavior. Similarly, symptoms of posttraumatic
stress disorder need to be differentiated from bipolar disorder. It is helpful to assess the ep­
isodic nature of the symptoms described, as well as to consider symptom triggers, in mak­
ing this differential diagnosis.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar disorder. Substance use disorders may mani­
fest with substance.medication-induced manic symptoms that must be distinguished
from bipolar I disorder; response to mood stabilizers during a substance/medication-
induced mania may not necessarily be diagnostic for bipolar disorder. There may be sub­
stantial overlap in view of the tendency for individuals with bipolar I disorder to overuse
substances during an episode. A primary diagnosis of bipolar disorder must be estab­
lished based on symptoms that remain once substances are no longer being used.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. This disorder may be misdiagnosed as bipolar
disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms overlap with the symp­
toms of mania, such as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibihty, and less need for
sleep. The "double counting" of symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar disorder can
be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether the symptom(s) represents a distinct episode.
Personality disorders. Personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder
may have substantial symptomatic overlap with bipolar disorders, since mood lability
and impulsivity are common in both conditions. Symptoms must represent a distinct ep­
isode, and the noticeable increase over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar dis­
order must be present. A diagnosis of a personality disorder should not be made during an
untreated mood episode.
Disorders with prominent irritability. In individuals with severe irritability, particularly
children and adolescents, care must be taken to apply the diagnosis of bipolar disorder
only to those who have had a clear episode of mania or hypomania—that is, a distinct time
period, of the required duration, during which the irritability was clearly different from
the individual's baseline and was accompanied by the onset of Criterion B symptoms.
When a child's irritability is persistent and particularly severe, the diagnosis of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder would be more appropriate. Indeed, when any child is being
assessed for mania, it is essential that the symptoms represent a clear change from the
child's typical behavior.

Comorbidity
Co-occurring mental disorders are common, with the most frequent disorders being any
anxiety disorder (e.g., panic attacks, social anxiety disorder [social phobia], specific pho­
bia), occurring in approximately three-fourths of individuals; ADHD, any disruptive, im-
pulse-control, or conduct disorder (e.g., intermittent explosive disorder, oppositional
defiant disorder, conduct disorder), and any substance use disorder (e.g., alcohol use dis­
order) occur in over half of individuals with bipolar I disorder. Adults with bipolar I dis­
order have high rates of serious and/or untreated co-occurring medical conditions.
Metabolic s)nidrome and migraine are more common among individuals with bipolar dis­
order than in the general population. More than half of individuals whose symptoms meet
criteria for bipolar disorder have an alcohol use disorder, and those with both disorders
are at greater risk for suicide attempt.


                                                            Bipolar II Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                      296.89 (F31.81)
For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for a cur­
rent or past hypomanie episode and the following criteria for a current or past major de­
pressive episode:
Hypomanie Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
   and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 4 consec­
   utive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three (or more)
   of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable), represent a no­
   ticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant degree:
    1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
    2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
    3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
   4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
   5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
      stimuli), as reported or obsen/ed.
   6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
      psychomotor agitation.
   7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse­
      quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
      foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac­
   teristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa­
   tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
   episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
   of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
   Note: A full hypomanie episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
   medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond
   the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanie episode
   diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms (particularly in­
   creased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use) are not taken
   as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanie episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bi­
   polar diathesis.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
   period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
   is either (1 ) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
   Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical condition.
   1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec­
      tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
      appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
   2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the
      day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
   3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
      5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every
      day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
   4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
   5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
      merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
   6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
   7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu­
      sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
   8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei­
      ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
   9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with­
      out a specific plan, a suicide attempt, or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
   medical condition.
Note: Criteria A-C above constitute a major depressive episode.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a nat­
ural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense sad­
ness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion
A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be under­
standable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode
in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should be carefully considered. This
decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history
and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.^
Bipolar II Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one hypomanie episode (Criteria A-F under “Hypo-
   manic Episode” above) and at least one major depressive episode (Criteria A-C under
   “Major Depressive Episode” above).
B. There has never been a manic episode.
C. The occurrence of the hypomanie episode(s) and major depressive episode(s) is not
   better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disor­
   der, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and
   other psychotic disorder.
D. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent alternation be­
   tween periods of depression and hypomania causes clinically significant distress or im­
   pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding and Recording Procedures
Bipolar II disorder has one diagnostic code: 296.89 (F31.81 ). Its status with respect to cur­
rent severity, presence of psychotic features, course, and other specifiers cannot be
coded but should be indicated in writing (e.g., 296.89 [F31.81] bipolar II disorder, current
episode depressed, moderate severity, with mixed features; 296.89 [F31.81] bipolar II dis­
order, most recent episode depressed, in partial remission).
Specify current or most recent episode:
   Hypomanie
   Depressed
Specify if:
   With anxious distress (p. 149)
   With mixed features (pp. 149-150)




 ^In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in grief
  the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in a MDE it is persistent depressed
  mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is likely to
  decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of grief. These
  waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The depressed mood of a
  MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. The pain of grief may
  be accompanied by positive emotions and humor that are uncharacteristic of the pervasive unhap­
  piness and misery characteristic of a MDE. The thought content associated with grief generally fea­
  tures a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical or
  pessinüstic ruminations seen in a MDE. In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in a
  MDE feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing are common. If self-derogatory ideation is present
  in grief, it typically involves perceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently
  enough, not telling the deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved individual thinks
  about death and dying, such thoughts are generally focused on the deceased and possibly about
  "’joining" the deceased, whereas in a MDE such thoughts are focused on ending one's own life
  because of feeling worthless, undeserving of üfe, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
   With rapid cycling (pp. 150-151)
   Withi   m ood-congruent psychotic features (p. 152)
   With    m ood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 152)
   With    catatonia (p. 152). Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
   With    péripartum onset (pp. 152-153)
   With    seasonal pattern (pp. 153-154): Applies only to the pattern of major depressive
   episodes.
Specify course if full criteria for a mood episode are not currently met:
   in partial remission (p. 154)
   In full remission (p. 154)
Specify severity if full criteria for a mood episode are currently met:
   lUlild (p. 154)
   lUloderate (p. 154)
   Severe (p. 154)_______________________________________________________



Diagnostic Features
Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes con­
sisting of one or more major depressive episodes (Criteria A-C under "Major Depressive
Episode") and at least one hypomanie episode (Criteria A-F under "Hypomanie Epi­
sode"). The major depressive episode must last at least 2 weeks, and the hypomarüc epi­
sode must last at least 4 days, to meet the diagnostic criteria. During the mood episode(s),
the requisite number of symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day, and
represent a noticeable change from usual behavior and functioning. The presence of a
manic episode during the course of illness precludes the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder
(Criterion B under "Bipolar II Disorder"). Episodes of substance/medication-induced de­
pressive disorder or substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder (repre­
senting the physiological effects of a medication, other somatic treatments for depression,
drugs of abuse, or toxin exposure) or of depressive and related disorder due to another
medical condition or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition do not
count toward a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder unless they persist beyond the physiolog­
ical effects of the treatment or substance and then meet duration criteria for an episode. In
addition, the episodes must not be better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder and are
not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or
other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum or other psychotic disorders (Cri­
terion C under "Bipolar II Disorder"). The depressive episodes or hypomanie fluctuations
must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion D under "Bipolar II Disorder"); however, for hy­
pomanie episodes, this requirement does not have to be met. A hypomanie episode that
causes significant impairment would likely qualify for the diagnosis of manic episode and,
therefore, for a lifetime diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. The recurrent major depressive ep­
isodes are often more frequent and lengthier than those occurring in bipolar I disorder.
    Individuals with bipolar II disorder typically present to a clinician during a major de­
pressive episode and are unlikely to complain initially of hypomania. Typically, the hy­
pomanie episodes themselves do not cause impairment. Instead, the impairment results
from the major depressive episodes or from a persistent pattern of unpredictable mood
changes and fluctuating, unreliable interpersonal or occupational functioning. Individu­
als with bipolar II disorder may not view the hypomanie episodes as pathological or dis­
advantageous, although others may be troubled by the individual's erratic behavior.
Clinical information from other informants, such as close friends or relatives, is often use­
ful in establishing the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder.
    A hypomanie episode should not be confused with the several days of euthymia and re­
stored energy or activity that may follow remission of a major depressive episode. Despite the
substantial differences in duration and severity between a manic and hypomanie episode, bi­
polar II disorder is not a "milder form" of bipolar I disorder. Compared with individuals with
bipolar I disorder, individuals with bipolar II disorder have greater chronicity of illness and
spend, on average, more time in the depressive phase of their illness, which can be severe and/
or disabling. Depressive symptoms co-occurring with a hypomanie episode or hypomanie
symptoms co-occurring with a depressive episode are common in individuals with bipolar Π
disorder and are overrepresented in females, particularly hypomania with mixed features. In­
dividuals experiencing hypomania with mixed features may not label their symptoms as hy­
pomania, but instead experience them as depression with increased energy or irritability.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A common feature of bipolar II disorder is impulsivity, which can contribute to suicide at­
tempts and substance use disorders. Impulsivity may also stem from a concurrent person­
ality disorder, substance use disorder, anxiety disorder, another mental disorder, or a
medical condition. There may be heightened levels of creativity in some individuals with
a bipolar disorder. However, that relationship may be nonlinear; that is, greater lifetime
creative accomplishments have been associated with milder forms of bipolar disorder, and
higher creativity has been found in unaffected family members. The individual's attach­
ment to heightened creativity during hypomanie episodes may contribute to ambivalence
about seeking treatment or undermine adherence to treatment.

Prevaience
The 12-month prevalence of bipolar II disorder, internationally, is 0.3%. In the United
States, 12-month prevalence is 0.8%. The prevalence rate of pediatric bipolar II disorder is
difficult to establish. DSM-IV bipolar I, bipolar II, and bipolar disorder not otherwise spec­
ified yield a combined prevalence rate of 1.8% in U.S. and non-U.S. community samples,
with higher rates (2.7% inclusive) in youths age 12 years or older.

Deveiopment and Course
Although bipolar II disorder can begin in late adolescence and throughout adulthood, av­
erage age at onset is the mid-20s, which is slightly later than for bipolar I disorder but ear­
lier than for major depressive disorder. The illness most often begins with a depressive
episode and is not recognized as bipolar II disorder until a hypomanie episode occurs; this
happens in about 12% of individuals with the initial diagnosis of major depressive disor­
der. Anxiety, substance use, or eating disorders may also precede the diagnosis, compli­
cating its detection. Many individuals experience several episodes of major depression
prior to the first recognized hypomanie episode.
    The number of lifetime episodes (both hypomanie and major depressive episodes)
tends to be higher for bipolar II disorder than for major depressive disorder or bipolar I
disorder. However, individuals with bipolar I disorder are actually more likely to experi­
ence hypomanie symptoms than are individuals with bipolar II disorder.The interval
between mood episodes in the course of bipolar II disorder tends to decrease as the indi­
vidual ages. While the hypomanie episode is the feature that defines bipolar II disorder,
depressive episodes are more enduring and disabling over time. Despite the predomi­
nance of depression, once a hypomanie episode has occurred, the diagnosis becomes bi­
polar II disorder and never reverts to major depressive disorder.
    Approximately 5%-15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have multiple (four or
more) mood episodes (hypomanie or major depressive) within the previous 12 months. If
this pattern is present, it is noted by the specifier "with rapid cycling." By definition, psy­
chotic symptoms do not occur in hypomanie episodes, and they appear to be less frequent
in the major depressive episodes in bipolar II disorder than in those of bipolar I disorder.
    Switching from a depressive episode to a manic or hypomanie episode (with or with­
out mixed features) may occur, both spontaneously and during treatment for depression.
About 5%-15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder will ultimately develop a manic ep­
isode, which changes the diagnosis to bipolar I disorder, regardless of subsequent course.
    Making the diagnosis in children is often a challenge, especially in those with irritabil­
ity and hyperarousal that is nonepisodic (i.e., lacks the well-demarcated periods of altered
mood). Nonepisodic irritability in youth is associated with an elevated risk for anxiety dis­
orders and major depressive disorder, but not bipolar disorder, in adulthood. Persistently
irritable youths have lower familial rates of bipolar disorder than do youths who have bi­
polar disorder. For a hypomanie episode to be diagnosed, the child's symptoms must ex­
ceed what is expected in a given environment and culture for the child's developmental
stage. Compared with adult onset of bipolar II disorder, childhood or adolescent onset of
the disorder may be associated with a more severe lifetime course. The 3-year incidence
rate of first-onset bipolar II disorder in adults older than 60 years is 0.34%. However, dis­
tinguishing individuals older than 60 years with bipolar II disorder by late versus early
age at onset does not appear to have any clinical utility.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. The risk of bipolar II disorder tends to be highest among rel­
atives of individuals with bipolar II disorder, as opposed to individuals with bipolar I dis­
order or major depressive disorder. There may be genetic factors influencing the age at
onset for bipolar disorders.
Course modifiers. A rapid-cycling pattern is associated with a poorer prognosis. Return
to previous level of social function for individuals with bipolar II disorder is more likely
for individuals of younger age and with less severe depression, suggesting adverse effects
of prolonged illness on recovery. More education, fewer years of illness, and being mar­
ried are independently associated with functional recovery in individuals with bipolar
disorder, even after diagnostic type (I vs. II), current depressive symptoms, and presence
of psychiatric comorbidity are taken into account.

Gender-Reiated Diagnostic issues
Whereas the gender ratio for bipolar I disorder is equal, findings on gender differences in
bipolar II disorder are mixed, differing by type of sample (i.e., registry, community, or
clinical) and country of origin. There is little to no evidence of bipolar gender differences,
whereas some, but not all, clinical samples suggest that bipolar II disorder is more com­
mon in females than in males, which may reflect gender differences in treatment seeking
or other factors.
    Patterns of illness and comorbidity, however, seem to differ by gender, with females
being more likely than males to report hypomania with mixed depressive features and a
rapid-cycling course. Childbirth may be a specific trigger for a hypomanie episode, which
can occur in 10%-20% of females in nonelinieal populations and most typically in the early
postpartum period. Distinguishing hypomania from the elated mood and reduced sleep
that normally accompany the birth of a child may be challenging. Postpartum hypomania
may foreshadow the onset of a depression that occurs in about half of females who expe­
rience postpartum "highs." Accurate detection of bipolar II disorder may help in estab­
lishing appropriate treatment of the depression, which may reduce the risk of suicide and
infanticide.
Suicide Risk
Suicide risk is high in bipolar II disorder. Approximately one-third of individuals with bi­
polar II disorder report a lifetime history of suicide attempt. The prevalence rates of life­
time attempted suicide in bipolar II and bipolar I disorder appear to be similar (32.4% and
36.3%, respectively). However, the lethality of attempts, as defined by a lower ratio of at­
tempts to completed suicides, may be higher in individuals with bipolar II disorder com­
pared with individuals with bipolar I disorder. There may be an association between
genetic markers and increased risk for suicidal behavior in individuals with bipolar dis­
order, including a 6.5-fold higher risk of suicide among first-degree relatives of bipolar II
probands compared with those with bipolar I disorder.

Functional Consequences of Bipolar II Disorder
Although many individuals with bipolar II disorder return to a fully functional level be­
tween mood episodes, at least 15% continue to have some inter-episode dysfunction, and
20% transition directly into another mood episode without inter-episode recovery. Func­
tional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms of bipolar II disorder,
especially in regard to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status de­
spite equivalent levels of education with the general population. Individuals with bipolar
II disorder perform more poorly than healthy individuals on cognitive tests and, with the
exception of memory and semantic fluency, have similar cognitive impairment as do in­
dividuals with bipolar I disorder. Cognitive impairments associated with bipolar II disor­
der may contribute to vocational difficulties. Prolonged unemployment in individuals
with bipolar disorder is associated with more episodes of depression, older age, increased
rates of current panic disorder, and lifetime history of alcohol use disorder.

Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. Perhaps the most challenging differential diagnosis to con­
sider is major depressive disorder, which may be accompanied by hypomanie or manic
symptoms that do not meet full criteria (i.e., either fewer symptoms or a shorter duration
than required for a hypomanie episode). This is especially true in evaluating individuals
with symptoms of irritability, which may be associated with either major depressive dis­
order or bipolar II disorder.
Cyclothymic disorder. In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous periods of hypo-
manic symptoms and numerous periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet symp­
tom or duration criteria for a major depressive episode. Bipolar II disorder is distinguished
from cyclothymic disorder by the presence of one or more major depressive episodes. If a
major depressive episode occurs after the first 2 years of cyclothymic disorder, the addi­
tional diagnosis of bipolar II disorder is given.
Schizophrenia spectrum and other related psychotic disorders. Bipolar II disorder must
be distinguished from psychotic disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia,
and delusional disorder). Schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and delusional disor­
der are all characterized by periods of psychotic symptoms that occur in the absence of
prominent mood symptoms. Other helpful considerations include the accompanying
symptoms, previous course, and family history.
Panic disorder or other anxiety disorders. Anxiety disorders need to be considered in
the differential diagnosis and may frequently be present as co-occurring disorders.
Substance use disorders.      Substance use disorders are included in the differential diag­
nosis.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
may be misdiagnosed as bipolar II disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many
symptoms of ADHD, such as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need
for sleep, overlap with the symptoms of hypomania. The double counting of symptoms to­
ward both ADHD and bipolar II disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether
the symptoms represent a distinct episode and if the noticeable increase over baseline re­
quired for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder is present.
Personality disorders. The same convention as applies for ADHD also applies when
evaluating an individual for a personality disorder such as borderline personality disor­
der, since mood lability and impulsivity are common in both personality disorders and bi­
polar II disorder. Symptoms must represent a distinct episode, and the noticeable increase
over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder must be present. A diagnosis
of a personality disorder should not be made during an untreated mood episode unless
the lifetime history supports the presence of a personality disorder.
Other bipolar disorders. Diagnosis of bipolar II disorder should be differentiated from
bipolar I disorder by carefully considering whether there have been any past episodes of
mania and from other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders by confirm­
ing the presence of fully syndromal hypomania and depression.

Comorbidity
Bipolar II disorder is more often than not associated with one or more co-occurring mental
disorders, with anxiety disorders being the most common. Approximately 60% of individ­
uals with bipolar II disorder have three or more co-occurring mental disorders; 75% have
an anxiety disorder; and 37% have a substance use disorder. Children and adolescents
with bipolar II disorder have a higher rate of co-occurring anxiety disorders compared
with those with bipolar I disorder, and the anxiety disorder most often predates the bi­
polar disorder. Anxiety and substance use disorders occur in individuals with bipolar II
disorder at a higher rate than in the general population. Approximately 14% of individuals
with bipolar II disorder have at least one lifetime eating disorder, with binge-eating dis­
order being more common than bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa.
     These commonly co-occurring disorders do not seem to follow a course of illness that
is truly independent from that of the bipolar disorder, but rather have strong associations
with mood states. For example, anxiety and eating disorders tend to associate most with
depressive symptoms, and substance use disorders are moderately associated with manic
symptoms.


                                                  Cyclothymic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                    301.13 (F34.0)
A. For at least 2 years (at least 1 year in children and adolescents) there have been nu­
   merous periods with hypomanie symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypomanie
   episode and numerous periods with depressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for
   a major depressive episode.
B. During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents), the hypomanie
   and depressive periods have been present for at least half the time and the individual
   has not been without the symptoms for more than 2 months at a time.
C. Criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanie episode have never been met.
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by schizoaffective disorder,
   schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified or un­
   specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
   drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
F. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
   With anxious distress (see p. 149)_______________________________________



Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cyclothymic disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood disturbance
involving numerous periods of hypomanie symptoms and periods of depressive symp­
toms that are distinct from each other (Criterion A). The hypomanie symptoms are of
insufficient number, severity, pervasiveness, or duration to meet full criteria for a hypo-
manic episode, and the depressive symptoms are of insufficient number, severity, perva­
siveness, or duration to meet full criteria for a major depressive episode. During the initial
2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents), the symptoms must be persistent (pres­
ent more days than not), and any symptom-free intervals last no longer than 2 months
(Criterion B). The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is made only if the criteria for a major
depressive, manic, or hypomanie episode have never been met (Criterion C).
    If an individual with cyclothymic disorder subsequently (i.e., after the initial 2 years in
adults or 1 year in children or adolescents) experiences a major depressive, manic, or hy­
pomanie episode, the diagnosis changes to major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder,
or other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder (subclassified as hypomanie
episode without prior major depressive episode), respectively, and the cyclothymic disor­
der diagnosis is dropped.
    The cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is not made if the pattern of mood swings is better
explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delu­
sional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders (Criterion D), in which ease the mood symptoms are considered asso­
ciated features of the psychotic disorder. The mood disturbance must also not be attribut­
able to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or
another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism) (Criterion E). Although some individ­
uals may function particularly well during some of the periods of hypomania, over the
prolonged course of the disorder, there must be clinically significant distress or impair­
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning as a result of the
mood disturbance (Criterion F). The impairment may develop as a result of prolonged pe­
riods of cyclical, often unpredictable mood changes (e.g., the individual may be regarded
as temperamental, moody, unpredictable, inconsistent, or unreliable).

Prevaience
The lifetime prevalence of cyclothymic disorder is approximately 0.4%-l%. Prevalence in
mood disorders clinics may range from 3% to 5%. In the general population, cyclothymic
disorder is apparently equally common in males and females. In clinical settings, females
with cyclothymic disorder may be more likely to present for treatment than males.

Deveiopment and Course
Cyclothymic disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult life and is sometimes
considered to reflect a temperamental predisposition to other disorders in this chapter.
Cyclothymic disorder usually has an insidious onset and a persistent course. There is a
15%-50% risk that an individual with cyclothymic disorder will subsequently develop bi­
polar I disorder or bipolar II disorder. Onset of persistent, fluctuating hypomanie and de­
pressive symptoms late in adult life needs to be clearly differentiated from bipolar and
related disorder due to another medical condition and depressive disorder due to another
medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis) before the cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is as­
signed. Among children with cyclothymic disorder, the mean age at onset of symptoms is
6.5 years of age.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, and bipolar II
disorder are more common among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with cyclo­
thymic disorder than in the general population. There may also be an increased familial risk of
substance-related disorders. Cyclotiiymic disorder may be more common in the first-degree
biological relatives of individuals witiK bipolar I disorder than in the general population.

Differentiai Diagnosis
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition and depressive disorder
due to another medical condition. The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to
another medical condition or depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
made when the mood disturbance is judged to be attributable to the physiological effect of
a specific, usually chronic medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism). This determination
is based on the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings. If it is judged that the
hypomanie and depressive symptoms are not the physiological consequence of the med­
ical condition, then the primary mental disorder (i.e., cyclothymic disorder) and the med­
ical condition are coded. For example, this would be the case if the mood symptoms are
considered to be the psychological (not the physiological) consequence of having a chronic
medical condition, or if there is no etiological relationship between the hypomanie and de­
pressive symptoms and the medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medica­
tion-induced depressive disorder. Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related
disorder and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder are distinguished from
cyclothymic disorder by the judgment that a substance/medication (especially stimu­
lants) is etiologically related to the mood disturbance. The frequent mood swings in these
disorders that are suggestive of cyclothymic disorder usually resolve following cessation
of substance/medication use.
Bipolar I disorder, with rapid cycling, and bipolar II disorder, with rapid cycling.
Both disorders may resemble cyclothymic disorder by virtue of the frequent marked shifts
in mood. By definition, in cyclothymic disorder the criteria for a major depressive, manic,
or hypomanie episode has never been met, whereas the bipolar I disorder and bipolar II
disorder specifier "with rapid cycling" requires that full mood episodes be present.
Borderline personality disorder. Borderline personality disorder is associated with
marked shifts in mood that may suggest cyclothymic disorder. If the criteria are met for
both disorders, both borderline personality disorder and cyclothymic disorder may be di­
agnosed.

Comorbidity
Substance-related disorders and sleep disorders (i.e., difficulties in initiating and main­
taining sleep) may be present in individuals with cyclothymic disorder. Most children
with cyclothymic disorder treated in outpatient psychiatric settings have comorbid mental
conditions; they are more likely than other pediatric patients with mental disorders to
have comorbid attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
                                Substance/Medication-Induced
                                  Bipolar and Related Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture
   and is characterized by elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, with or without depressed
   mood, or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
   (1)and (2):
   1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
      or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
   2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite­
      rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a bipolar or related disorder that is not sub­
   stance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent bipolar or related disor­
   der could include the following:
       The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms per­
       sist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute
       withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence
       of an independent non-substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
       (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-
induced bipolar and related disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-
induced bipolar and related disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder'’ before the substance-induced bipolar and related dis­
order (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder”). If a
moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced bipolar
and related disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moder­
ate [substance] use disorder'’ or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity
of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g.,
after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the
clinician should record only the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder.

                                                                   ICD-10-CM

                                                                    With use
                                                     With use       disorder,       Without
                                                     disorder,      moderate          use
                                      ICD-9-CIVI        mild        or severe       disorder
 Alcohol                                291.89        F10.14          F10.24         FI 0.94
 Phencyclidine                          292.84        F16.14          FI 6.24        F16.94
 Other hallucinogen                     292.84        F16.14          FI 6.24        F16.94
                                                                 ICD-10-CM

                                                                  With use
                                                   With use       disorder,      Without
                                                   disorder,      moderate         use
                                     ICD-9-CM        mild         or severe      disorder
 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic    292.84         F13.14        F13.24         F13.94
 Amphetamine (or other                292.84         F15.14        F15.24         FI 5.94
 stimulant)
 Cocaine                              292.84         F14.14        F14.24         F14.94
 Other (or unknown) substance         292.84         F19.14        F19.24         FI 9.94
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di­
agnoses associated with substance class):
   With onset during intoxication: If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub­
   stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
   With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance
   and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.


Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disor­
der begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to
be causing the bipolar mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table in­
cluded in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit
into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for "other substance" should be
used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category "unknown substance" should be used.
    The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in­
toxication, onset during withdrawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-IO-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of irritable symptoms occurring during intoxication in a man with a
severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.84 cocaine-induced bipolar and related
disorder, with onset during intoxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine
use disorder is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant
role in the development of bipolar mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g.,
292.84 methylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxi­
cation; 292.84 dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during in­
toxication).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disor­
der begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to
be causing the bipolar mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table in­
cluded in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a co-
morbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g.,
dexamethasone), the code for "other substance" should be used; and in cases in which a
substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is un­
known, the category "unknown substance" should be used.
     When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word "with," followed by the name of the substance-induced
bipolar and related disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in­
toxication, onset during withdrawal). For example, in the case of irritable symptoms oc­
curring during intoxication in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is
F14.24 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder,
with onset during intoxication. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use
disorder is not given. If the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder occurs without
a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no
accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.94 amphetamine-induced bipolar
and related disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of bipolar mood symptoms, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use disorder with meth-
ylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.94
dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication).

Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic features of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder are es­
sentially the same as those for mania, hypomania, or depression. A key exception to the diag­
nosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder is the case of hypomania
or mania that occurs after antidepressant medication use or other treatments and persists be­
yond the physiological effects of the medication. This condition is considered an indicator of
true bipolar disorder, not substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder. Simi­
larly, individuals with apparent electroconvulsive therapy-induced manic or hypomanie ep­
isodes that persist beyond the physiological effects of the treatment are diagnosed with
bipolar disorder, not substance/medication-induced bipolar ^ d related disorder.
    Side effects of some antidepressants and other psychotropic drugs (e.g., edginess, ag­
itation) may resemble the primary symptoms of a manic syndrome, but they are funda­
mentally distinct from bipolar symptoms and are insufficient for the diagnosis. That is, the
criterion symptoms of mania/hypomania have specificity (simple agitation is not the same
as excess involvement in purposeful activities), and a sufficient number of symptoms
must be present (not just one or two symptoms) to make these diagnoses. In particular, the
appearance of one or two nonspecific sjonptoms—irritability, edginess, or agitation during
antidepressant treatment—in the absence of a full manic or hypomanie syndrome should
not be taken to support a diagnosis of a bipolar disorder.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (causally related to the use of psychotropic medications or substances of abuse
based on best clinical evidence) is the key variable in this etiologically specified form of bi­
polar disorder. Substances/medications that are typically considered to be associated
with substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder include the stimulant
class of drugs, as well as phencyclidine and steroids; however, a number of potential sub­
stances continue to emerge as new compounds are synthesized (e.g., so-called bath salts).
A history of such substance use may help increase diagnostic certainty.

Prevaience
There are no epidemiological studies of substance/medication-induced mania or bipolar
disorder. Each etiological substance may have its own individual risk of inducing a bipo­
lar (manic/hypomanie) disorder.

Deveiopment and Course
In phencyclidine-induced mania, the initial presentation may be one of a delirium with af­
fective features, which then becomes an atypically appearing manic or mixed manic state.
This condition follows the ingestion or inhalation quickly, usually within hours or, at the
most, a few dayâ^ In stimulant-induced manic or hypomanie states, the response is in min­
utes to 1 hour after one or several ingestions or injections. The episode is very brief and
typically resolves over 1-2 days. With corticosteroids and some immunosuppressant
medications, the mania (or mixed or depressed state) usually follows several days of in­
gestion, and the higher doses appear to have a much greater likelihood of producing bi­
polar symptoms.

Diagnostic iVlari(ers
Determination of the substance of use can be made through markers in the blood or urine
to corroborate diagnosis.

Differentiai Diagnosis
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder should be differentiated
from other bipolar disorders, substance intoxication or substance-induced delirium, and
medication side effects (as noted earlier). A full manic episode that emerges during anti­
depressant treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully
syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for
a bipolar I diagnosis. A full hypomanie episode that emerges during antidepressant treat­
ment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level
beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a bipolar II di­
agnosis only if preceded by a major depressive episode.

Comorbidity
Comorbidities are those associated with the use of illicit substances (in the case of illegal
stimulants or phencyclidine) or diversion of prescribed stimulants. Comorbidities related
to steroid or immunosuppressant medications are those medical indications for these
preparations. Delirium can occur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals in­
gesting phencyclidine or those who are prescribed steroid medications or other immuno­
suppressant medications.


                                Bipolar and Related Disorder
                           Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
   and abnormally increased activity or energy that predominates in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the dis­
   turbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning, or necessitates hospitalization to pre­
   vent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for bipolar and related disorder due to another medical
condition is 293.83, which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code
depends on the specifier (see below).
Specify if:
   (F06.33) With manic features: Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanie ep­
   isode.
   (F06.33) With manic- or hypomanic-iii<e episode: Full criteria are met except Crite­
   rion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanie episode.
   (F06.34) With mixed features: Symptoms of depression are also present but do not
   predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic fea­
tures). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immedi­
ately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 242.90
[E05.90] hyperthyroidism; 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with
manic features).


Diagnostic Features
The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irri­
table mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical pic­
ture that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the manic
or hypomanie picture may appear during the initial presentation of the medical condition
(i.e., within 1 month); however, there are exceptions, especially in chronic medical condi­
tions that might worsen or relapse and herald the appearance of the manic or hypomanie
picture. Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diag­
nosed when the manic or hypomanie episodes definitely preceded the medical condition,
since the proper diagnosis would be bipolar disorder (except in the unusual circumstance
in which all preceding manic or hypomanie episodes—or, when only one such episode has
occurred, the preceding manic or hypomanie episode—were associated with ingestion of
a substance/medication). The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition should not be made during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The
manic or hypomanie episode in bipolar and related disorder due to another medical con­
dition must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning to qualify for this diagnosis (Criterion E).

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical ev­
idence) is the key variable in this etiologically specified form of bipolar disorder. The list­
ing of medical conditions that are said to be able to induce mania is never complete, and
the clinician's best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis. Among the best known of the
medical conditions that can cause a bipolar manic or hypomanie condition are Cushing's
disease and multiple sclerosis, as well as stroke and traumatic brain injuries.

Deveiopment and Course
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition usually has its onset acutely
or subacutely within the first weeks or month of the onset of the associated medical con­
dition. However, this is not always the case, as a worsening or later relapse of the associ­
ated medical condition may precede the onset of the manic or hypomanie syndrome. The
clinician must make a clinical judgment in these situations about whether the medical con­
dition is causative, based on temporal sequence as well as plausibility of a causal relation­
ship. Finally, the condition may remit before or just after the medical condition remits,
particularly wh^n treatment of the manic/hypomanie symptoms is effective.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related differences, to the extent that there is any evidence, pertain to those asso­
ciated with the medical condition (e.g., rates of multiple sclerosis and stroke vary around
the world based on dietary, genetic factors, and other environmental factors).

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., systemic
lupus erythematosus is more common in females; stroke is somewhat more common in
middle-age males compared with females).

Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid
levels in blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing's disease, which can
be associated with manic or depressive syndromes; laboratory tests confirming the diag­
nosis of multiple sclerosis).

Functional Consequences of Bipolar and Related
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Functional consequences of the bipolar symptoms may exacerbate impairments associ­
ated with the medical condition and may incur worse outcomes due to interference with
medical treatment. In general, it is believed, but not established, that the illness, when in­
duced by Cushing's disease, will not recur if the Cushing's disease is cured or arrested.
However, it is also suggested, but not established, that mood syndromes, including de­
pressive and manic/hypomanie ones, may be episodic (i.e., recurring) with static brain in­
juries and other central nervous system diseases.

Differential Diagnosis
Symptoms of delirium, catatonia, and acute anxiety. It is important to differentiate
symptoms of mania from excited or hypervigilant delirious symptoms; from excited cata­
tonic symptoms; and from agitation related to acute anxiety states.
Medication-induced depressive or manic symptoms. An important differential diag­
nostic observation is that the other medical condition may be treated with medications
(e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these
cases, clinical judgment using all of the evidence in hand is the best way to try to separate
the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with
the medical condition vs. a substance/medication-induced syndrome). The differential di­
agnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the
present manual.

Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition
are those associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. Delirium can oc­
cur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals with Cushing's disease.
    Other Specified Bipolar and Related Disorder
                                                                      296.89 (F31.89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar and
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any of the disorders in the bipolar and related disorders diagnostic class. The other
specified bipolar and related disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the cri­
teria for any specific bipolar and related disorder. This is done by recording “other speci­
fied bipolar and related disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “short-duration
cyclothymia”).
    Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1. Short-duration hypomanie episodes (2 -3 days) and major depressive episodes: A
   lifetime history of one or more major depressive episodes in individuals whose presenta­
   tion has never met full criteria for a manic or hypomanie episode but who have experienced
   two or more episodes of short-duration hypomania that meet the full symptomatic criteria
   for a hypomanie episode but that only last for 2-3 days. The episodes of hypomanie symp­
   toms do not overlap in time with the major depressive episodes, so the disturbance does
   not meet criteria for major depressive episode, with mixed features.
2. Hypomanie episodes with insufficient symptoms and major depressive epi­
   sodes: A lifetime history of one or more major depressive episodes in individuals
   whose presentation has never met full criteria for a manic or hypomanie episode but
   who have experienced one or more episodes of hypomania that do not meet full symp­
   tomatic criteria (i.e., at least 4 consecutive days of elevated mood and one or two of
   the other symptoms of a hypomanie episode, or irritable mood and two or three of the
   other symptoms of a hypomanie episode). The episodes of hypomanie symptoms do
   not overlap in time with the major depressive episodes, so the disturbance does not
   meet criteria for major depressive episode, with mixed features.
3. Hypomanie episode without prior major depressive episode: One or more hypo-
   manic episodes in an individual whose presentation has never met full criteria for a ma­
   jor depressive episode or a manic episode. If this occurs in an individual with an
   established diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), both diagnoses
   can be concurrently applied during the periods when the full criteria for a hypomanie
   episode are met.
4. Short-duration eyelothymia (less than 24 months): Multiple episodes of hypomanie
   symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypomanie episode and multiple episodes of de­
   pressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for a major depressive episode that persist
   over a period of less than 24 months (less than 12 months for children or adolescents)
   in an individual whose presentation has never met full criteria for a major depressive,
   manic, or hypomanie episode and does not meet criteria for any psychotic disorder. Dur­
   ing the course of the disorder, the hypomanie or depressive symptoms are present for
   more days than not, the individual has not been without symptoms for more than 2 months
   at a time, and the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment.
                       Unspecified Bipolar and Related Disorder
_________________________________ V_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                                                                                                                                296.80 (F31.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar and
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any of the disorders in the bipolar and related disorders diagnostic class. The unspec­
ified bipolar and related disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician choos­
es not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific bipolar and related
disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a
more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).



             Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders
Specify if:
  With anxious distress: The presence of at least two of the following symptoms during
       the majority of days of the current or most recent episode of mania, hypomania, or de­
       pression:
       1.     Feeling keyed up or tense.
       2.     Feeling unusually restless.
       3.     Difficulty concentrating because of worry.
       4.     Fear that something awful may happen.
       5.     Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself or herself.
              Specify current severity:
                 lUlild: Two symptoms.
                 lUloderate: Three symptoms.
                 Moderate-severe: Four or five symptoms.
                 Severe: Four or five symptoms with motor agitation.
               Note: Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar and
          major depressive disorder in both primary care and specialty mental health set­
          tings. High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk, longer
          duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment nonresponse. As a result, it
          is clinically useful to specify accurately the presence and severity levels of anxious
          distress for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
       With mixed features: The mixed features specifier can apply to the current manic, hy­
       pomanie, or depressive episode in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder:
               IManic or hypomanie episode, with mixed features:
               A. Full criteria are met for a manic episode or hypomanie episode, and at least
                  three of the following symptoms are present during the majority of days of the
                  current or most recent episode of mania or hypomania:
                      1. Prominent dysphoria or depressed mood as indicated by either subjective
                         report (e.g., feels sad or empty) or observation made by others (e.g., ap­
                         pears tearful).
                      2. Diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities (as indicated by
                         either subjective account or observation made by others).
                      3. Psychomotor retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not merely
                         subjective feelings of being slowed down).
      4. Fatigue or loss of energy.
      5. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (not merely
         self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
      6. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ide­
         ation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for com­
         mitting suicide.
   B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
      person’s usual behavior.
   C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania and
      depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode, with mixed
      features, due to the marked impairment and clinical severity of full mania.
   D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub­
      stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment).
   Depressive episode, witli mixed features:
   A. Full criteria are met for a major depressive episode, and at least three of the fol­
      lowing manic/hypomanic symptoms are present during the majority of days of
      the current or most recent episode of depression:
      1.  Elevated, expansive mood.
      2.  Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
      3.  More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
      4.  Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
      5.  Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school,
          or sexually).
       6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
          for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees,
          sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
       7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual;
          to be contrasted with insomnia).
   B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
      person’s usual behavior.
   C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania and
      depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode, with mixed
      features.
   D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub­
      stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment).
   Note: Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been found
   to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
   As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier for treatment
   planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
W itli rapid cycling (can be applied to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder): Presence of at
least four mood episodes in the previous 12 months that meet the criteria for manic,
hypomanie, or major depressive episode.
   Note: Episodes are demarcated by either partial or full remissions of at least 2 months
   or a switch to an episode of the opposite polarity (e.g., major depressive episode to
   manic episode).
   Note: The essential feature of a rapid-cycling bipolar disorder is the occurrence of
   at least four mood episodes during the previous 12 months. These episodes can
   occur in any combination and order. The episodes must meet both the duration and
   symptom number criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanie episode and
   must be demarcated by either a period of full remission or a switch to an episode
   of the opposite polarity. Manic and hypomanie episodes are counted as being on
   the same pole. Except for the fact that they occur more frequently, the episodes that
   occur in a rapid-cycling pattern are no different from those that occur in a non-rapid-
   cycling pattern. Mood episodes that count toward defining a rapid-cycling pattern
   exclude those episodes directly caused by a substance (e.g., cocaine, corticoste­
   roids) or another medical condition.
With melancholic features:
A. One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current episode;
   1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
   2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better, even
      temporarily, when something good happens).
B. Three (or more) of the following:
   1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound despondency,
      despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
   2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
   3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
   4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
   5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.
   6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
   Note: The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are pres­
   ent at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-complete absence of
   the capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the
   lack of reactivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with
   marked brightening of mood. Either mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens
   only partially (e.g., up to 2 0% -40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The “dis­
   tinct quality” of mood that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features” speci­
   fier is experienced as qualitatively different from that during a nonmelancholic
   depressive episode. A depressed mood that is described as merely more severe,
   longer lasting, or present without a reason is not considered distinct in quality. Psy­
   chomotor changes are nearly always present and are observable by others.
      Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes
   in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to outpa­
   tients; are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major depressive epi­
   sodes; and are more likely to occur in those with psychotic features.
With atypical features: This specifier can be applied when these features predomi­
nate during the majority of days of the current or most recent major depressive epi­
sode.
A. Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive
   events).
B. Two (or more) of the following features:
   1.   Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.
   2.   Hypersomnia.
   3.   Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs).
   4.   A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to epi­
        sodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant social or occupational
        impairment.
C. Criteria are not met for “with melancholic features” or “with catatonia” during the
   same episode.
   Note: “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in contradis­
   tinction to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of depression
   that were the norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in outpatients and al­
   most never in adolescents or younger adults) and today does not connote an un­
   common or unusual clinical presentation as the term might imply.
      Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive
   events (e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become
   euthymie (not sad) even for extended periods of time if the external circumstances
   remain favorable. Increased appetite may be manifested by an obvious increase in
   food intake or by weight gain. Hypersomnia may include either an extended period
   of nighttime sleep or daytime napping that totals at least 10 hours of sleep per day
   (or at least 2 hours more than when not depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as
   feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation
   is generally present for at least an hour a day but often lasts for many hours at a
   time. Unlike the other atypical features, pathological sensitivity to perceived inter­
   personal rejection is a trait that has an early onset and persists throughout most of
   adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs both when the person is and is not depressed,
   though it may be exacerbated during depressive periods.
With psychotic features: Delusions or hallucinations are present at any time in the
episode. If psychotic features are present, specify if mood-congruent or mood-incon-
gruent:
       With mood-congruent psychotic features: During manic episodes, the con­
       tent of all delusions and hallucinations is consistent with the typical manic
       themes of grandiosity, invulnerability, etc., but may also include themes of sus­
       piciousness or paranoia, especially with respect to others’ doubts about the in­
       dividual’s capacities, accomplishments, and so forth.
       With m ood-incongruent psychotic features: The content of delusions and
       hallucinations is inconsistent with the episode polarity themes as described
       above, or the content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent
       themes.
With catatonia: This specifier can apply to an episode of mania or depression if cata­
tonic features are present during most of the episode. See criteria for catatonia asso­
ciated with a mental disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
Psychotic Disorders.”
With péripartum onset: This specifier can be applied to the current or, if the full crite­
ria are not currently met for a mood episode, most recent episode of mania, hypoma-
nia, or major depression in bipolar I or bipolar I! disorder if onset of mood symptoms
occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks following delivery.
    Note: Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or postpartum.
    Although the estimates differ according to the period of follow-up after delivery, be­
    tween 3% and 6% of women will experience the onset of a major depressive epi­
    sode during pregnancy or in the weeks or months following delivery. Fifty percent
    of “postpartum” major depressive episodes actually begin prior to delivery. Thus,
    these episodes are referred to collectively as péripartum episodes. Women with
    péripartum major depressive episodes often have severe anxiety and even panic
    attacks. Prospective studies have demonstrated that mood and anxiety symptoms
    during pregnancy, as well as the “baby blues,” increase the risk for a postpartum
    major depressive episode.
       Peripartum-onset mood episodes can present either with or without psychotic
    features^ Infanticide is most often associated with postpartum psychotic episodes
    that are characterized by command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that
    the infant is possessed, but psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpar­
    tum mood episodes without such specific delusions or hallucinations.
       Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic features
    appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be more common
    in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with psychotic features is
    particularly increased for women with prior postpartum mood episodes but is also
    elevated for those with a prior history of a depressive or bipolar disorder (especially
    bipolar I disorder) and those with a family history of bipolar disorders.
       Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk
    of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum
    episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period,
    which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpar­
    tum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and
    psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breast-feeding on treatment plan­
    ning, and the long-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder on sub­
    sequent family planning.
With seasonal pattern: This specifier applies to the lifetime pattern of mood episodes.
The essential feature is a regular seasonal pattern of at least one type of episode (i.e.,
mania, hypomania, or depression). The other types of episodes may not follow this pat­
tern. For example, an individual may have seasonal manias, but his or her depressions
do not regularly occur at a specific time of year.
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of manic, hypo-
   manic, or major depressive episodes and a particular time of the year (e.g., in the
   fall or winter) in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
   Note: Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally related
   psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every winter).
B. Full remissions (or a change from major depression to mania or hypomania or vice
   versa) also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression disappears
   in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, the individual’s manic, hypomanie, or major depressive episodes
   have demonstrated a temporal seasonal relationship, as defined above, and no
   non-seasonal episodes of that polarity have occurred during that 2-year period.
D. Seasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions (as described above) substantially
   outnumber any nonseasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions that may have
   occurred over the individual’s lifetime.
   Note: This specifier can be applied to the pattern of major depressive episodes in
   bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or major depressive disorder, recurrent. The
   essential feature is the onset and remission of major depressive episodes at char­
   acteristic times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and
   remit in spring. Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive epi­
   sodes. This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during
   at least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this
   period. In addition, the seasonal depressive episodes must substantially outnum­
   ber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
     This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better ex­
   plained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal unemployment
   or school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a seasonal pattern
       are often characterized by prominent energy, hypersomnia, overeating, weight
       gain, and a craving for carbohydrates. It is unclear whether a seasonal pattern is
       more likely in recurrent major depressive disorder or in bipolar disorders. However,
       within the bipolar disorders group, a seasonal pattern appears to be more likely in
       bipolar II disorder than in bipolar I disorder. In some individuals, the onset of manic
       or hypomanie episodes may also be linked to a particular season.
         The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude,
       age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong pre­
       dictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive epi­
       sodes.
Specify if:
   In partial remission: Symptoms of the immediately previous manic, hypomanie, or
   depressive episode are present, but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting
   less than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a manic, hypomanie, or major
   depressive episode following the end of such an episode.
   In full remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of the
   disturbance were present.
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those symptoms,
and the degree of functional disability.
   Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to meet the diagnostic criteria
   are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and the
   symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
   Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional impair­
   ment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
   Severe: The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of those required to make
   the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and unmanage­
   able, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social and occupational functioning.
D ep rG S S iV G d iS O rd G rS include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, major
depressive disorder (including major depressive episode), persistent depressive disorder
(dysthymia), premenstrual dysphoric disorder, substance/medication-induced depres­
sive disorder, depressive disorder due to another medical condition, other specified de­
pressive disorder, and imspecified depressive disorder. Unlike in DSM-IV, this chapter
"Depressive Disorders" has been separated from the previous chapter "Bipolar and Re­
lated Disorders." The common feature of all of these disorders is the presence of sad,
empty, or irritable mood, accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that signifi­
cantly affect the individual's capacity to function. What differs among them are issues of
duration, timing, or presumed etiology.
    In order to address concerns about the potential for the overdiagnosis of and treatment
for bipolar disorder in children, a new diagnosis, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
referring to the presentation of children with persistent irritability and frequent episodes
of extreme behavioral dyscontrol, is added to the depressive disorders for children up to
12 years of age. Its placement in this chapter reflects the finding that children with this
symptom pattern typically develop unipolar depressive disorders or anxiety disorders,
rather than bipolar disorders, as they mature into adolescence and adulthood.
    Major depressive disorder represents the classic condition in this group of disorders. It
is characterized by discrete episodes of at least 2 weeks' duration (although most episodes
last considerably longer) involving clear-cut changes in affect, cognition, and neurovege-
tative functions and inter-episode remissions. A diagnosis based on a single episode is
possible, although the disorder is a recurrent one in the majority of cases. Careful consid­
eration is given to the delineation of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive ep­
isode. Bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce an episode
of major depressive disorder. When they do occur together, the depressive symptoms and
functional impairment tend to be more severe and the prognosis is worse compared with
bereavement that is not accompanied by major depressive disorder. Bereavement-related
depression tends to occur in persons with other vulnerabilities to depressive disorders,
and recovery may be facilitated by antidepressant treatment.
    A more chronic form of depression, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), can be
diagnosed when the mood disturbance continues for at least 2 years in adults or 1 year in
children. This diagnosis, new in DSM-5, includes both the DSM-IV diagnostic categories of
chronic major depression and dysthymia.
    After careful scientific review of the evidence, premenstrual dysphoric disorder has
been moved from an appendix of DSM-IV ("Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further
Study") to Section II of DSM-5. Almost 20 years of additional of research on this condition
has confirmed a specific and treatment-responsive form of depressive disorder that begins
sometime following ovulation and remits within a few days of menses and has a marked
impact on functioning.
    A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several
medical conditions can be associated with depression-like phenomena. This fact is recog­
nized in the diagnoses of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder and depres­
sive disorder due to another medical condition.
              Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                       296.99 (F34.8)
A. Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages) and/or be­
   haviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are grossly out of
   proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.
B. The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
C. The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week.
D. The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the day,
   nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers, peers).
E. Criteria A-D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time, the indi­
   vidual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without all of the
   symptoms in Criteria A-D.
F. Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at school,
   with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
G. The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after age 18
   years.
H. By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A-E is before 10 years.
I. There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the full
   symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanie episode have been met.
   Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the context of a
   highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as a symptom of ma­
   nia or hypomania.
J. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive disorder
   and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism spectrum disor­
   der, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder, persistent depressive
   disorder [dysthymia]).
   Note: This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent ex­
   plosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with others, including major
   depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, and
   substance use disorders. Individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive
   mood dysregulation disorder and oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the
   diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experi­
   enced a manic or hypomanie episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
   disorder should not be assigned.
K. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to an­
   other medical or neurological condition.


Diagnostic Features
The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic, severe persistent ir-
ritabihty. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical manifestations, the first of
which is frequent temper outbursts. These outbursts typically occur in response to frus­
tration and can be verbal or behavioral (the latter in the form of aggression against prop­
erty, self, or others). They must occur frequently (i.e., on average, three or more times per
week) (Criterion C) over at least 1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in
the home and at school, and they must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B).
The second manifestation of severe irritability consists of chronic, persistently irritable or
angry mood that is present between the severe temper outbursts. This irritable or angry
mood must be characteristic of the child, being present most of the day, nearly every day,
and noticeable by others in the child's environment (Criterion D).
    The clinical presentation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be carefully
distinguished from presentations of other, related conditions, particularly pediatric bi­
polar disorder. In fact, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder was added to DSM-5 to
address the considerable concern about the appropriate classification and treatment of
children who present with chronic, persistent irritability relative to children who present
with classic (i.e., episodic) bipolar disorder.
    Some researchers view severe, non-episodic irritability as characteristic of bipolar dis­
order in children, although both DSM-IV and DSM-5 require that both children and adults
have distinct episodes of mania or hypomania to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar I dis­
order. During the latter decades of the 20th century, this contention by researchers that
severe, nonepisodic irritability is a manifestation of pediatric mania coincided with an up­
surge in the rates at which clinicians assigned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder to their
pediatric patients. This sharp increase in rates appears to be attributable to clinicians com­
bining at least two clinical presentations into a single category. That is, both classic, epi­
sodic presentations of mania and non-episodic presentations of severe irritability have
been labeled as bipolar disorder in children. In DSM-5, the term bipolar disorder is explicitly
reserved for episodic presentations of bipolar symptoms. DSM-IV did not include a diagno­
sis designed to capture youths whose hallmark symptoms consisted of very severe, non-
episodic irritability, whereas DSM-5, with the inclusion of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, provides a distinct category for such presentations.


Prevalence
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is common among children presenting to pedi­
atric mental health clinics. Prevalence estimates of the disorder in the community are un­
clear. Based on rates of chronic and severe persistent irritability, which is the core feature
of the disorder, the overall 6-month to 1-year period-prevalence of disruptive mood dys­
regulation disorder among children and adolescents probably falls in the 2%-5% range.
However, rates are expected to be higher in males and school-age children than in females
and adolescents.

Development and Course
The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be before age 10 years, and the
diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of less than 6 years.
It is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because
the symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are likely to change as children
mature, use of the diagnosis should be restricted to age groups similar to those in which
validity has been established (7-18 years). Approximately half of children with severe,
chronic irritability will have a presentation that continues to meet criteria for the condition
1 year later. Rates of conversion from severe, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder
are very low. Instead, children with chronic irritability are at risk to develop unipolar de­
pressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood.
     Age-related variations also differentiate classic bipolar disorder and disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder. Rates of bipolar disorder generally are very low prior to adoles­
cence (<1%), with a steady increase into early adulthood (l%-2% prevalence). Disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder is more common than bipolar disorder prior to adolescence,
and symptoms of the condition generally become less common as children transition into
adulthood.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Children with chronic irritability typically exhibit complicated psy­
chiatric histories. In such children, a relatively extensive history of chronic irritability is
common, typically manifesting before full criteria for the syndrome are met. Such predi­
agnostic presentations may have qualified for a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder.
Many children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also
meet criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and for an anxiety dis­
order, with such diagnoses often being present from a relatively early age. For some chil­
dren, the criteria for major depressive disorder may also be met.
Genetic and physiological. In terms of familial aggregation and genetics, it has been
suggested that children presenting with chronic, non-episodic irritability can be differen­
tiated from children with bipolar disorder in their family-based risk. However, these two
groups do not differ in familial rates of anxiety disorders, unipolar depressive disorders,
or substance abuse. Compared with children with pediatric bipolar disorder or other men­
tal illnesses, those with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder exhibit both commonal­
ities and differences in information-processing deficits. For example, face-emotion
labeling deficits, as well as perturbed decision making and cognitive control, are present in
children with bipolar disorder and chronically irritable children, as well as in children
with some other psychiatric conditions. There is also evidence for disorder-specific dys­
function, such as during tasks assessing attention deployment in response to emotional
stimuli, which has demonstrated unique signs of dysfunction in children with chronic ir­
ritability.

Gender-Related Diagnostic issues
Children presenting to clinics with features of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are
predominantly male. Among community samples, a male preponderance appears to be
supported. This difference in prevalence between males and females differentiates disrup­
tive mood dysregulation disorder from bipolar disorder, in which there is an equal gender
prevalence.

Suicide Risic
In general, evidence documenting suicidal behavior and aggression, as well as other se­
vere functional consequences, in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be noted
when evaluating children with chronic irritability.

Functionai Consequences of
Disruptive iVlood Dysreguiation Disorder
Chronic, severe irritability, such as is seen in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is
associated with marked disruption in a child's family and peer relationships, as well as in
school performance. Because of their extremely low frustration tolerance, such children
generally have difficulty succeeding in school; they are often unable to participate in the
activities typically enjoyed by healthy children; their family life is severely disrupted by
their outbursts and irritability; and they have trouble initiating or sustaining friendships.
Levels of dysfunction in children with bipolar disorder and disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder are generally comparable. Both conditions cause severe disruption in the lives of
the affected individual and their families. In both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
and pediatric bipolar disorder, dangerous behavior, suicidal ideation or suicide attempts,
severe aggression, and psychiatric hospitalization are common.

Differential Diagnosis
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histo­
ries, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be made while consid­
ering the presence or absence of multiple other conditions. Despite the need to consider
