are in remission. When an individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophre­
nia) that was preceded by schizoid personality disorder, schizoid personality disorder
should also be recorded, followed by "premorbid" in parentheses.
Autism spectrum disorder. There may be great difficulty differentiating individuals with
schizoid personality disorder from those with milder forms of autism spectrum disorder,
which may be differentiated by more severely impaired social interaction and stereotyped
behaviors and interests.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Schizoid personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge are attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Schizoid personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may be
confused with schizoid personality disorder because they have certain features in com­
mon. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences
in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that
meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to schizoid personality dis­
order, all can be diagnosed. Although characteristics of social isolation and restricted af-
fectivity are common to schizoid, schizotypal, and paranoid personality disorders,
schizoid personality disorder can be distinguished from schizotypal personality disorder
by the lack of cognitive and perceptual distortions and from paranoid personality disorder
by the lack of suspiciousness and paranoid ideation. The social isolation of schizoid per­
sonality disorder can be distinguished from that of avoidant personality disorder, which is
attributable to fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate and excessive anticipation
of rejection. In contrast, people with schizoid personality disorder have a more pervasive
detachment and limited desire for social intimacy. Individuals with obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder may also show an apparent social detachment stemming from devo­
tion to work and discomfort with emotions, but they do have an underlying capacity for
intimacy.
    Individuals who are "loners" may display personality traits that might be considered
schizoid. Only when these traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant func­
tional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute schizoid personality disorder.


                             Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                       301.22 (F21)
A. A pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort
   with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual
   distortions and eccentricities of behavior, beginning by early adulthood and present in
   a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
   1. Ideas of reference (excluding delusions of reference).
   2. Odd beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior and is inconsistent with
      subcultural norms (e.g., superstitiousness, belief in clairvoyance, telepathy, or
      “sixth sense”: in children and adolescents, bizarre fantasies or preoccupations).
   3. Unusual perceptual experiences, including bodily illusions.
   4. Odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, circumstantial, metaphorical, overelaborate,
      or stereotyped).
   5. Suspiciousness or paranoid ideation.
   6.   Inappropriate or constricted affect.
   7.   Behavior or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar.
   8.   Lack of close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.
   9.   Excessive social anxiety that does not diminish with familiarity and tends to be as­
        sociated with paranoid fears rather than negative judgments about self.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or
   depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism
   spectrum disorder.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” e.g., “schizo­
typal personality disorder (premorbid).”


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of schizotypal personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social
and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for,
close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of be­
havior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
    Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder often have ideas of reference (i.e., in­
correct interpretations of casual incidents and external events as having a particular and
unusual meaning specifically for the person) (Criterion A l). These should be distin­
guished from delusions of reference, in which the beliefs are held with delusional convic­
tion. These individuals may be superstitious or preoccupied with paranormal phenomena
that are outside the norms of their subculture (Criterion A2). They may feel that they have
special powers to sense events before they happen or to read others' thoughts. They may
believe that they have magical control over others, which can be implemented directly
(e.g., believing that their spouse's taking the dog out for a walk is the direct result of think­
ing an hour earlier it should be done) or indirectly through compliance with magical rit­
uals (e.g., walking past a specific object three times to avoid a certain harmful outcome).
Perceptual alterations may be present (e.g., sensing that another person is present or hear­
ing a voice murmuring his or her name) (Criterion A3). Their speech may include unusual
or idiosyncratic phrasing and construction. It is often loose, digressive, or vague, but with­
out actual derailment or incoherence (Criterion A4). Responses can be either overly con­
crete or overly abstract, and words or concepts are sometimes applied in unusual ways
(e.g., the individual may state that he or she was not "talkable" at work).
    Individuals with this disorder are often suspicious and may have paranoid ideation
(e.g., believing their colleagues at work are intent on undermining their reputation with
the boss) (Criterion A5). They are usually not able to negotiate the full range of affects and
interpersonal cuing required for successful relationships and thus often appear to interact
with others in an inappropriate, stiff, or constricted fashion (Criterion A6). These individ­
uals are often considered to be odd or eccentric because of unusual mannerisms, an often
unkempt manner of dress that does not quite "fit together," and inattention to the usual
social conventions (e.g., the individual may avoid eye contact, wear clothes that are ink
stained and ill-fitting, and be unable to join in the give-and-take banter of co-workers)
(Criterion A7).
    Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder experience interpersonal related­
ness as problematic and are uncomfortable relating to other people. Although they may
express unhappiness about their lack of relationships, their behavior suggests a decreased
desire for intimate contacts. As a result, they usually have no or few close friends or con­
fidants other than a first-degree relative (Criterion A8). They are anxious in social situa­
tions, particularly those involving unfamiliar people (Criterion A9). They will interact
with other individuals when they have to but prefer to keep to themselves because they
feel that they are different and just do not "fit in." Their social anxiety does not easily abate.
even when they spend more time in the setting or become more familiar with the other
people, because t^heir anxiety tends to be associated with suspiciousness regarding others'
motivations. For example, when attending a dinner party, the individual with schizotypal
personality disorder will not become more relaxed as time goes on, but rather may become
increasingly tense and suspicious.
   Schizotypal personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior oc­
curs exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with
psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder (Criterion B).

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizotypal personality disorder often seek treatment for the associated
symptoms of anxiety or depression rather than for the personality disorder features per se.
Particularly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience transient
psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours), although they usually are insufficient in du­
ration to warrant an additional diagnosis such as brief psychotic disorder or schizophreni­
form disorder. In some cases, clinically significant psychotic symptoms may develop that
meet criteria for brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder,
or schizophrenia. Over half may have a history of at least one major depressive episode.
From 30% to 50% of individuals diagnosed with this disorder have a concurrent diagnosis
of major depressive disorder when admitted to a clinical setting. There is considerable co­
occurrence with schizoid, paranoid, avoidant, and borderline personality disorders.

Prevalence
In community studies of schizotypal personality disorder, reported rates range from 0.6%
in Norwegian samples to 4.6% in a U.S. community sample. The prevalence of schizotypal
personality disorder in clinical populations seems to be infrequent (0%-1.9%), with a
higher estimated prevalence in the general population (3.9%) found in the National Epi­
demiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions.

Development and Course
Schizotypal personality disorder has a relatively stable course, with only a small propor­
tion of individuals going on to develop schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with
solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school, hyper­
sensitivity, peculiar thoughts and language, and bizarre fantasies. These children may ap­
pear "odd" or "eccentric" and attract teasing.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Schizotypal personality disorder appears to aggregate fa­
milially and is more prevalent among the first-degree biological relatives of individuals
with schizophrenia than among the general population. There may also be a modest in­
crease in schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in the relatives of probands with
schizotypal personality disorder.

Cultural-Related Diagnostic issues
Cognitive and perceptual distortions must be evaluated in the context of the individual's
cultural milieu. Pervasive culturally determined characteristics, particularly those regard­
ing religious beliefs and rituals, can appear to be schizotypal to the uninformed outsider
(e.g., voodoo, speaking in tongues, life beyond death, shamanism, mind reading, sixth
sense, evil eye, magical beliefs related to health and illness).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Schizotypal personality disorder may be slightly more common in males.

Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms. Schizotypal personality disorder
can be distinguished from delusional disorder, schizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive
disorder with psychotic features because these disorders are all characterized by a period
of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an addi­
tional diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder, the personality disorder must have
been present before the onset of psychotic symptoms and persist when the psychotic
symptoms are in remission. When an individual has a persistent psychotic disorder (e.g.,
schizophrenia) that was preceded by schizotypal personality disorder, schizotypal per­
sonality disorder should also be recorded, followed by "premorbid" in parentheses.
Neurodevelopmental disorders. There may be great difficulty differentiating children
with schizotypal personality disorder from the heterogeneous group of solitary, odd chil­
dren whose behavior is characterized by marked social isolation, eccentricity, or peculiar­
ities of language and whose diagnoses would probably include milder forms of autism
spectrum disorder or language communication disorders. Communication disorders may
be differentiated by the primacy and severity of the disorder in language and by the char­
acteristic features of impaired language found in a specialized language assessment.
Milder forms of autism spectrum disorder are differentiated by the even greater lack of so­
cial awareness and emotional reciprocity and stereotyped behaviors and interests.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Schizotypal personality disor­
der must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge are attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Schizotypal personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with schizotypal personality disorder because they have certain features in
common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differ­
ences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features
that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to schizotypal person­
ality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although paranoid and schizoid personality disor­
ders may also be characterized by social detachment and restricted affect, schizotypal
personality disorder can be distinguished from these two diagnoses by the presence of
cognitive or perceptual distortions and marked eccentricity or oddness. Close relation­
ships are limited in both schizotypal personality disorder and avoidant personality dis­
order; however, in avoidant personality disorder an active desire for relationships is
constrained by a fear of rejection, whereas in schizotypal personality disorder there is
a lack of desire for relationships and persistent detachment. Individuals with narcissistic
personality disorder may also display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation,
but in narcissistic personality disorder these qualities derive primarily from fears of hav­
ing imperfections or flaws revealed. Individuals with borderline personality disorder may
also have transient, psychotic-like symptoms, but these are usually more closely related to
affective shifts in response to stress (e.g., intense anger, anxiety, disappointment) and are
usually more dissociative (e.g., derealization, depersonalization). In contrast, individuals
with schizotypal personality disorder are more likely to have enduring psychotic-like symp­
toms that may worsen under stress but are less likely to be invariably associated with pro­
nounced affective symptoms. Although social isolation may occur in borderline personality
disorder, it is usually secondary to repeated interpersonal failures due to angry outbursts
and frequent mood shifts, rather than a result of a persistent lack of social contacts and de­
sire for intimacy. Furthermore, individuals with schizotypal personality disorder do not
usually demonstrate the impulsive or manipulative behaviors of the individual with bor­
derline personality disorder. However, there is a high rate of co-occurrence between the
two disorders, so that making such distinctions is not always feasible. Schizotypal features
during adolescence may be reflective of transient emotional turmoil, rather than an endur­
ing personality disorder.




         Cluster B Personality Disorders

                                 Antisocial Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                       301.7 (F60.2)
A. A pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others, occurring since
   age 15 years, as indicated by three (or more) of the following:
   1. Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors, as indicated by
      repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest.
   2. Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for
      personal profit or pleasure.
   3. Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead.
   4. Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults.
   5. Reckless disregard for safety of self or others.
   6. Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent
      work behavior or honor financial obligations.
   7. Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt,
      mistreated, or stolen from another.
B. The individual is at least age 18 years.
C. There is evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years.
D. The occurrence of antisocial behavior is not exclusively during the course of schizo­
   phrenia or bipolar disorder.


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of antisocial personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of disregard
for, and violation of, the rights of others that begins in childhood or early adolescence and
continues into adulthood. This pattern has also been referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy,
or dyssocial personality disorder. Because deceit and manipulation are central features of an­
tisocial personality disorder, it may be especially helpful to integrate information acquired
from systematic clinical assessment with information collected from collateral sources.
    For this diagnosis to be given, the individual must be at least age 18 years (Criterion B)
and must have had a history of some symptoms of conduct disorder before age 15 years
(Criterion C). Conduct disorder involves a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in
which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are vio­
lated. The specific behaviors characteristic of conduct disorder fall into one of four cate­
gories: aggression to people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, or
serious violation of rules.
    The pattern of antisocial behavior continues into adulthood. Individuals with antiso­
cial personality disorder fail to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behavior
(Criterion Al). They may repeatedly perform acts that are grounds for arrest (whether
they are arrested or not), such as destroying property, harassing others, stealing, or pur­
suing illegal occupations. Persons with this disorder disregard the wishes, rights, or feel­
ings of others. They are frequently deceitful and manipulative in order to gain personal
profit or pleasure (e.g., to obtain money, sex, or power) (Criterion A2). They may repeat­
edly lie, use an alias, con others, or malinger. A pattern of impulsivity may be manifested
by a failure to plan ahead (Criterion A3). Decisions are made on the spur of the moment,
without forethought and without consideration for the consequences to self or others; this
may lead to sudden changes of jobs, residences, or relationships. Individuals with antiso­
cial personality disorder tend to be irritable and aggressive and may repeatedly get into
physical fights or commit acts of physical assault (including spouse beating or child beat­
ing) (Criterion A4). (Aggressive acts that are required to defend oneself or someone else
are not considered to be evidence for this item.) These individuals also display a reckless
disregard for the safety of themselves or others (Criterion A5). This may be evidenced in
their driving behavior (i.e., recurrent speeding, driving while intoxicated, multiple acci­
dents). They may engage in sexual behavior or substance use that has a high risk for harm­
ful consequences. They may neglect or fail to care for a child in a way that puts the child in
danger.
    Individuals with antisocial personality disorder also tend to be consistently and ex­
tremely irresponsible (Criterion A6). Irresponsible work behavior may be indicated by sig­
nificant periods of unemployment despite available job opportunities, or by abandonment
of several jobs without a realistic plan for getting another job. There may also be a pattern
of repeated absences from work that are not explained by illness either in themselves or in
their family. Financial irresponsibility is indicated by acts such as defaulting on debts, fail­
ing to provide child support, or failing to support other dependents on a regular basis. In­
dividuals with antisocial personality disorder show little remorse for the consequences of
their acts (Criterion A7). They may be indifferent to, or provide a superficial rationaliza­
tion for, having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from someone (e.g., 'Tife's unfair," "losers de­
serve to lose"). These individuals may blame the victims for being foolish, helpless, or
deserving their fate (e.g., "he had it coming anyway"); they may minimize the harmful
consequences of their actions; or they may simply indicate complete indifference. They
generally fail to compensate or make amends for their behavior. They may believe that
everyone is out to "help number one" and that one should stop at nothing to avoid being
pushed around.
    The antisocial behavior must not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia
or bipolar disorder (Criterion D).

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with antisocial personality disorder frequently lack empathy and tend to be
callous, cynical, and contemptuous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others. They
may have an inflated and arrogant self-appraisal (e.g., feel that ordinary work is beneath
them or lack a realistic concern about their current problems or their future) and may be
excessively opinionated, self-assured, or cocky. They may display a glib, superficial charm
and can be quite voluble and verbally facile (e.g., using technical terms or jargon that
might impress someone who is unfamiliar with the topic). Lack of empathy, inflated self­
appraisal, and superficial charm are features that have been commonly included in tradi­
tional conceptions of psychopathy that may be particularly distinguishing of the disorder
and more predictive of recidivism in prison or forensic settings, where criminal, delin­
quent, or aggressive acts are likely to be nonspecific. These individuals may also be irre­
sponsible and exploitative in their sexual relationships. They may have a history of many
sexual partners and may never have sustained a monogamous relationship. They may be
irresponsible as parents, as evidenced by malnutrition of a child, an illness in the child re­
sulting from a \aèk of minimal hygiene, a child's dependence on neighbors or nonresident
relatives for food or shelter, a failure to arrange for a caretaker for a young child when the
individual is away from home, or repeated squandering of money required for household
necessities. These individuals may receive dishonorable discharges from the armed ser­
vices, may fail to be self-supporting, may become impoverished or even homeless, or may
spend many years in penal institutions. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder
are more likely than people in the general population to die prematurely by violent means
(e.g., suicide, accidents, homicides).
    Individuals with antisocial personality disorder may also experience dysphoria, in­
cluding complaints of tension, inability to tolerate boredom, and depressed mood. They
may have associated anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, substance use disorders, so­
matic symptom disorder, gambling disorder, and other disorders of impulse control. In­
dividuals with antisocial personality disorder also often have personality features that
meet criteria for other personality disorders, particularly borderline, histrionic, and nar­
cissistic personality disorders. The likelihood of developing antisocial personality disor­
der in adult life is increased if the individual experienced childhood onset of conduct
disorder (before age 10 years) and accompanying attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Child abuse or neglect, unstable or erratic parenting, or inconsistent parental discipline
may increase the likelihood that conduct disorder will evolve into antisocial personality
disorder.

Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence rates of antisocial personality disorder, using criteria from pre­
vious DSMs, are between 0.2% and 3.3%. The highest prevalence of antisocial personality
disorder (greater than 70%) is among most severe samples of males with alcohol use dis­
order and from substance abuse clinics, prisons, or other forensic settings. Prevalence is
higher in samples affected by adverse socioeconomic (i.e., poverty) or sociocultural (i.e.,
migration) factors.

Development and Course
Antisocial personality disorder has a chronic course but may become less evident or remit
as the individual grows older, particularly by the fourth decade of life. Although this re­
mission tends to be particularly evident with respect to engaging in criminal behavior,
there is likely to be a decrease in the full spectrum of antisocial behaviors and substance
use. By definition, antisocial personality cannot be diagnosed before age 18 years.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Antisocial personality disorder is more common among the
first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population.
The risk to biological relatives of females with the disorder tends to be higher than the risk
to biological relatives of males with the disorder. Biological relatives of individuals with
this disorder are also at increased risk for somatic symptom disorder and substance use
disorders. Within a family that has a member with antisocial personality disorder, males
more often have antisocial personality disorder and substance use disorders, whereas fe­
males more often have somatic symptom disorder. However, in such families, there is an
increase in prevalence of all of these disorders in both males and females compared with
the general population. Adoption studies indicate that both genetic and environmental
factors contribute to the risk of developing antisocial personality disorder. Both adopted
and biological children of parents with antisocial personality disorder have an increased
risk of developing antisocial personality disorder, somatic symptom disorder, and sub­
stance use disorders. Adopted-away children resemble their biological parents more than
their adoptive parents, but the adoptive family environment influences the risk of devel­
oping a personality disorder and related psychopathology.

Culture-Related Diagnostic issues
Antisocial personality disorder appears to be associated with low socioeconomic status
and urban settings. Concerns have been raised that the diagnosis may at times be misap­
plied to individuals in settings in which seemingly antisocial behavior may be part of a
protective survival strategy. In assessing antisocial traits, it is helpful for the clinician to
consider the social and economic context in which the behaviors occur.

Gender-Related Diagnostic issues
Antisocial personality disorder is much more common in males than in females. There has
been some concern that antisocial personality disorder may be underdiagnosed in fe­
males, particularly because of the emphasis on aggressive items in the definition of con­
duct disorder.

Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not given to individuals younger than
18 years and is given only if there is a history of some symptoms of conduct disorder be­
fore age 15 years. For individuals older than 18 years, a diagnosis of conduct disorder is
given only if the criteria for antisocial personality disorder are not met.
Substance use disorders. When antisocial behavior in an adult is associated with a
substance use disorder, the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not made unless
the signs of antisocial personality disorder were also present in childhood and have con­
tinued into adulthood. When substance use and antisocial behavior both began in childhood
and continued into adulthood, both a substance use disorder and antisocial personality
disorder should be diagnosed if the criteria for both are met, even though some antisocial
acts may be a consequence of the substance use disorder (e.g., illegal selling of drugs, thefts
to obtain money for drugs).
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorders. Antisocial behavior that occurs exclusively dur­
ing the course of schizophrenia or a bipolar disorder should not be diagnosed as antisocial
personality disorder.
Other personality disorders. Other personality disorders may be confused with antiso­
cial personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore im­
portant to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or
more personality disorders in addition to antisocial personality disorder, all can be diag­
nosed. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder and narcissistic personality disor­
der share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial, exploitative, and lack empathy.
However, narcissistic personality disorder does not include characteristics of impulsivity,
aggression, and deceit. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality disorder may
not be as needy of the admiration and envy of others, and persons with narcissistic per­
sonality disorder usually lack the history of conduct disorder in childhood or criminal
behavior in adulthood. Individuals with antisocial personality disorder and histrionic
personality disorder share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial, excitement seeking,
reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons with histrionic personality disorder
tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not characteristically engage in an­
tisocial behaviors. Individuals with histrionic and borderline personality disorders are
manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial personality disorder are
manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Individuals with
antisocial personality disorder tend to be less emotionally unstable and more aggressive
than those with borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial behavior may be
present in some individuals with paranoid personality disorder, it is not usually moti­
vated by a desire for personal gain or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder,
but rather is more often attributable to a desire for revenge.
Criminal behavior not associated with a personality disorder. Antisocial personality
disorder must be distinguished from criminal behavior undertaken for gain that is not ac­
companied by the personality features characteristic of this disorder. Only when antisocial
personality traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persistent and cause significant func­
tional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute antisocial personality disorder.


                                 Borderline Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                       301.83 (F60.3)
A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects,
and marked impulsivity, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts,
as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. (Note: Do not include suicidal
    or self-mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)
2. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by alternat­
    ing between extremes of idealization and devaluation.
3. Identity disturbance: markedly and persistently unstable self-image or sense of self.
4. Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging (e.g., spending, sex,
    substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating). (Note: Do not include suicidal or self-
    mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)
5. Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilating behavior.
6. Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria,
    irritability, or anxiety usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a few days).
7. Chronic feelings of emptiness.
8. Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g., frequent displays of
    temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights).
9. Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms._______


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of borderline personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of instability
of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects, and marked impulsivity that begins
by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
     Individuals with borderline personality disorder make frantic efforts to avoid real or
imagined abandonment (Criterion 1). The perception of impending separation or rejection,
or the loss of external structure, can lead to profound changes in self-image, affect, cognition,
and behavior. These individuals are very sensitive to environmental circumstances. They ex­
perience intense abandonment fears and inappropriate anger even when faced with a real­
istic time-limited separation or when there are unavoidable changes in plans (e.g., sudden
despair in reaction to a clinician's announcing the end of the hour; panic or fury when some­
one important to them is just a few minutes late or must cancel an appointment). They may
believe that this "abandonment" implies they are "bad." These abandonment fears are re­
lated to an intolerance of being alone and a need to have other people with them. Their frantic
efforts to avoid abandonment may include impulsive actions such as self-mutilating or sui­
cidal behaviors, which are described separately in Criterion 5.
    Individuals with borderline personality disorder have a pattern of unstable and intense
relationships (Criterion 2). They may idealize potential caregivers or lovers at the first or
second meeting, demand to spend a lot of time together, and share the most intimate details
early in a relationship. However, they may switch quickly from idealizing other people to
devaluing them, feeling that the other person does not care enough, does not give enough,
or is not "there" enough. These individuals can empathize with and nurture other people,
but only with the expectation that the other person will "be there" in return to meet their
own needs on demand. These individuals are prone to sudden and dramatic shifts in their
view of others, who may alternatively be seen as beneficent supports or as cruelly punitive.
Such shifts often reflect disillusionment with a caregiver whose nurturing qualities had
been idealized or whose rejection or abandonment is expected.
    There may be an identity disturbance characterized by markedly and persistently un­
stable self-image or sense of self (Criterion 3). There are sudden and dramatic shifts in self­
image, characterized by shifting goals, values, and vocational aspirations. There may be
sudden changes in opinions and plans about career, sexual identity, values, and types of
friends. These individuals may suddenly change from the role of a needy supplicant for
help to that of a righteous avenger of past mistreatment. Although they usually have a self­
image that is based on being bad or evil, individuals with this disorder may at times have
feelings that they do not exist at all. Such experiences usually occur in situations in which
the individual feels a lack of a meaningful relationship, nurturing, and support. These in­
dividuals may show worse performance in unstructured work or school situations.
    Individuals with borderline personality disorder display impulsivity in at least two areas
that are potentially self-damaging (Criterion 4). They may gamble, spend money irrespon­
sibly, binge eat, abuse substances, engage in unsafe sex, or drive recklessly. Individuals
with this disorder display recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilat­
ing behavior (Criterion 5). Completed suicide occurs in 8%-10% of such individuals, and
self-mutilative acts (e.g., cutting or burning) and suicide threats and attempts are very
common. Recurrent suicidality is often the reason that these individuals present for help.
These self-destructive acts are usually precipitated by threats of separation or rejection or
by expectations that the individual assumes increased responsibility. Self-mutilation may
occur during dissociative experiences and often brings relief by reaffirming the ability to
feel or by expiating the individual's sense of being evil.
    Individuals with borderline personality disorder may display affective instability that
is due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anx­
iety usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a few days) (Criterion 6). The
basic dysphoric mood of those with borderline personality disorder is often disrupted by
periods of anger, panic, or despair and is rarely relieved by periods of well-being or satis­
faction. These episodes may reflect the individual's extreme reactivity to interpersonal
stresses. Individuals with borderline personality disorder may be troubled by chronic feel­
ings of emptiness (Criterion 7). Easily bored, they may constantly seek something to do.
Individuals with this disorder frequently express inappropriate, intense anger or have dif­
ficulty controlling their anger (Criterion 8). They may display extreme sarcasm, enduring
bitterness, or verbal outbursts. The anger is often elicited when a caregiver or lover is seen
as neglectful, withholding, uncaring, or abandoning. Such expressions of anger are often
followed by shame and guilt and contribute to the feeling they have of being evil. During
periods of extreme stress, transient paranoid ideation or dissociative symptoms (e.g., de­
personalization) may occur (Criterion 9), but these are generally of insufficient severity or
duration to warrant an additional diagnosis. These episodes occur most frequently in re­
sponse to a real or imagined abandonment. Symptoms tend to be transient, lasting min­
utes or hours. The real or perceived return of the caregiver's nurturance may result in a
remission of symptoms.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with borderline personality disorder may have a pattern of undermining
themselves at the moment a goal is about to be realized (e.g., dropping out of school just
before graduation; regressing severely after a discussion of how well therapy is going; de­
stroying a good relationship just when it is clear that the relationship could last). Some in­
dividuals develop psychotic-like symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, body-image distortions,
ideas of reference, hypnagogic phenomena) during times of stress. Individuals with this
disorder may feel more secure with transitional objects (i.e., a pet or inanimate possession)
than in interpersonal relationships. Premature death from suicide may occur in individu­
als with this disorder, especially in those with co-occurring depressive disorders or sub­
stance use disorders. Physical handicaps may result from self-inflicted abuse behaviors or
failed suicide attempts. Recurrent job losses, interrupted education, and separation or di­
vorce are common. Physical and sexual abuse, neglect, hostile conflict, and early parental
loss are more common in the childhood histories of those with borderline personality dis­
order. Common co-occurring disorders include depressive and bipolar disorders, sub­
stance use disorders, eating disorders (notably bulimia nervosa), posttraumatic stress
disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Borderline personahty disorder
also frequently co-occurs with the other personality disorders.

Prevalence
The median population prevalence of borderline personality disorder is estimated to be
1.6% but may be as high as 5.9%. The prevalence of borderline personality disorder is
about 6% in primary care settings, about 10% among individuals seen in outpatient mental
health clinics, and about 20% among psychiatric inpatients. The prevalence of borderline
personality disorder may decrease in older age groups.

Development and Course
There is considerable variability in the course of borderline personahty disorder. The most
common pattern is one of chronic instability in early adulthood, with episodes of serious
affective and impulsive dyscontrol and high levels of use of health and mental health re­
sources. The impairment from the disorder and the risk of suicide are greatest in the
young-adult years and gradually wane with advancing age. Although the tendency to­
ward intense emotions, impulsivity, and intensity in relationships is often lifelong, indi­
viduals who engage in therapeutic intervention often show improvement beginning
sometime during the first year. During their 30s and 40s, the majority of individuals with
this disorder attain greater stability in their relationships and vocational functioning. Fol­
low-up studies of individuals identified through outpatient mental health clinics indicate
that after about 10 years, as many as half of the individuals no longer have a pattern of be­
havior that meets full criteria for borderline personality disorder.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Borderline personality disorder is about five times more
common among first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the gen­
eral population. There is also an increased familial risk for substance use disorders, anti­
social personality disorder, and depressive or bipolar disorders.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The pattern of behavior seen in borderline personality disorder has been identified in many
settings around the world. Adolescents and young adults with identity problems (especially
when accompanied by substance use) may transiently display behaviors that misleadingly
give the impression of borderline personality disorder. Such situations are characterized by
emotional instability, "existential" dilemmas, uncertainty, anxiety-provoking choices, con­
flicts about sexual orientation, and competing social pressures to decide on careers.

Gender-Related Diagnostic issues
Borderline personality disorder is diagnosed predominantly (about 75%) in females.

Differential Diagnosis
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Borderline personality disorder often co-occurs with
depressive or bipolar disorders, and when criteria for both are met, both may be diagnosed.
Because the cross-sectional presentation of borderline personality disorder can be mimicked
by an episode of depressive or bipolar disorder, the clinician should avoid giving an addi­
tional diagnosis of borderline personality disorder based only on cross-sectional presenta­
tion without having documented that the pattern of behavior had an early onset and a long­
standing course.
Other personality disorders. Other personality disorders may be confused with border­
line personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore im­
portant to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet criteria for one or
more personality disorders in addition to borderline personality disorder, all can be diag­
nosed. Although histrionic personality disorder can also be characterized by attention seek­
ing, manipulative behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions, borderline personality disorder
is distinguished by self-destructiveness, angry disruptions in close relationships, and
chronic feelings of deep emptiness and loneliness. Paranoid ideas or illusions may be pres­
ent in both borderline personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder, but these
symptoms are more transient, interpersonally reactive, and responsive to external structur­
ing in borderline personality disorder. Although paranoid personality disorder and narcis­
sistic personality disorder may also be characterized by an angry reaction to minor stimuli,
the relative stability of self-image, as well as the relative lack of self-destructiveness, impul-
sivity, and abandonment concerns, distinguishes these disorders from borderline person­
ality disorder. Although antisocial personality disorder and borderline personality disorder
are both characterized by manipulative behavior, individuals with antisocial personality
disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification,
whereas the goal in borderline personality disorder is directed more toward gaining the con­
cern of caretakers. Both dependent personality disorder and borderline personality disorder
are characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the individual with borderline person­
ality disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional emptiness, rage, and de­
mands, whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder reacts with increasing
appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship to provide
caregiving and support. Borderline personality disorder can further be distinguished from
dependent personality disorder by the typical pattern of unstable and intense relationships.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Borderline personality disor­
der must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge are attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Borderline personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Identity problems. Borderline personality disorder should be distinguished from an
identity problem, which is reserved for identity concerns related to a developmental phase
(e.g., adolescence) and does not qualify as a mental disorder.
                                  Histrionic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                      301.50 (F60.4)
A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking, beginning by early adult­
hood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the center of attention.
2. Interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate sexually seductive or
   provocative behavior.
3. Displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions.
4. Consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self.
5. Has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail.
6. Shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and exaggerated expression of emotion.
7. Is suggestible (i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances).
8. Considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are.


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of histrionic personality disorder is pervasive and excessive emotion­
ality and attention-seeking behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is pres­
ent in a variety of contexts.
    Individuals with histrionic personality disorder are uncomfortable or feel unappreci­
ated when they are not the center of attention (Criterion 1). Often lively and dramatic, they
tend to draw attention to themselves and may initially charm new acquaintances by their
enthusiasm, apparent openness, or flirtatiousness. These qualities wear thin, however, as
these individuals continually demand to be the center of attention. They commandeer the
role of "the life of the party." If they are not the center of attention, they may do something
dramatic (e.g., make up stories, create a scene) to draw the focus of attention to themselves.
This need is often apparent in their behavior with a clinician (e.g., being flattering, bring­
ing gifts, providing dramatic descriptions of physical and psychological symptoms that
are replaced by new symptoms each visit).
    The appearance and behavior of individuals with this disorder are often inappropri­
ately sexually provocative or seductive (Criterion 2). This behavior not only is directed to­
ward persons in whom the individual has a sexual or romantic interest but also occurs in
a wide variety of social, occupational, and professional relationships beyond what is ap­
propriate for the social context. Emotional expression may be shallow and rapidly shifting
(Criterion 3). Individuals with this disorder consistently use physical appearance to draw
attention to themselves (Criterion 4). They are overly concerned with impressing others by
their appearance and expend an excessive amount of time, energy, and money on clothes
and grooming. They may "fish for compliments" regarding appearance and may be easily
and excessively upset by a critical conunent about how they look or by a photograph that
they regard as unflattering.
    These individuals have a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking
in detail (Criterion 5). Strong opinions are expressed with dramatic flair, but underlying
reasons are usually vague and diffuse, without supporting facts and details. For example,
an individual with histrionic personality disorder may comment that a certain individual
is a wonderful human being, yet be unable to provide any specific examples of good qual­
ities to support this opinion. Individuals with this disorder are characterized by self­
dramatization, theatricality, and an exaggerated expression of emotion (Criterion 6). They
may embarrass friends and acquaintances by an excessive public display of emotions (e.g.,
embracing casual acquaintances with excessive ardor, sobbing uncontrollably on minor
sentimental occasions, having temper tantrums). However, their emotions often seem to
be turned on and off too quickly to be deeply felt, which may lead others to accuse the in­
dividual of faking these feelings.
    Individuals with histrionic personality disorder have a high degree of suggestibility (Cri­
terion 7). Their opinions and feelings are easily influenced by others and by current fads.
They may be overly trusting, especially of strong authority figures whom they see as mag­
ically solving their problems. They have a tendency to play hunches and to adopt convic­
tions quickly. Individuals with this disorder often consider relationships more intimate
than they actually are, describing almost every acquaintance as "my dear, dear friend" or
referring to physicians met only once or twice under professional circumstances by their
first names (Criterion 8).

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with histrionic personality disorder may have difficulty achieving emotional in­
timacy in romantic or sexual relationships. Without being aware of it, they often act out a
role (e.g., "victim" or "princess") in their relationships to others. They may seek to control
their partner through emotional manipulation or seductiveness on one level, while display­
ing a marked dependency on them at another level. Individuals with this disorder often
have impaired relationships with same-sex friends because their sexually provocative inter­
personal style may seem a threat to their friends' relationships. These individuals may also
alienate friends with demands for constant attention. They often become depressed and up­
set when they are not the center of attention. They may crave novelty, stimulation, and ex­
citement and have a tendency to become bored with their usual routine. These individuals
are often intolerant of, or frustrated by, situations that involve delayed gratification, and
their actions are often directed at obtaining immediate satisfaction. Although they often ini­
tiate a job or project with great enthusiasm, their interest may lag quickly. Longer-term re­
lationships may be neglected to make way for the excitement of new relationships.
    The actual risk of suicide is not known, but clinical experience suggests that individu­
als with this disorder are at increased risk for suicidal gestures and threats to get attention
and coerce better caregiving. Histrionic personality disorder has been associated with
higher rates of somatic symptom disorder, conversion disorder (functional neurological
symptom disorder), and major depressive disorder. Borderline, narcissistic, antisocial, and
dependent personality disorders often co-occur.

Prevalence
Data from the 2001-2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Condi­
tions suggest a prevalence of histrionic personality of 1.84%.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Norms for interpersonal behavior, personal appearance, and emotional expressiveness
vary widely across cultures, genders, and age groups. Before considering the various traits
(e.g., emotionality, seductiveness, dramatic interpersonal style, novelty seeking, sociabil­
ity, charm, impressionability, a tendency to somatization) to be evidence of histrionic per­
sonality disorder, it is important to evaluate whether they cause clinically significant
impairment or distress.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, this disorder has been diagnosed more frequently in females; however,
the sex ratio is not significantly different from the sex ratio of females within the respective
clinical setting. In contrast, some studies using structured assessments report similar prev­
alence rates among males and females.
Differential Diagnosis
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with histrionic personality disorder because they have certain features in
common. It is therefore important to distinguish among these disorders based on differ­
ences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features
that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to histrionic personal­
ity disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although borderline personality disorder can also be
characterized by attention seeking, manipulative behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions,
it is distinguished by self-destructiveness, angry disruptions in close relationships, and
chronic feelings of deep emptiness and identity disturbance. Individuals with antisocial
personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder share a tendency to be impulsive,
superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons with
histrionic personality disorder tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions and do not
characteristically engage in antisocial behaviors. Individuals with histrionic personality
disorder are manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas those with antisocial personality
disorder are manipulative to gain profit, power, or some other material gratification. Al­
though individuals with narcissistic personality disorder also crave attention from others,
they usually want praise for their '"superiority," whereas individuals with histrionic per­
sonality disorder are willing to be viewed as fragile or dependent if this is instrumental in
getting attention. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder may exaggerate the
intimacy of their relationships with other people, but they are more apt to emphasize the
"VIP" status or wealth of their friends. In dependent personality disorder, the individual
is excessively dependent on others for praise and guidance, but is without the flamboyant,
exaggerated, emotional features of individuals with histrionic personality disorder.
     Many individuals may display histrionic personality traits. Only when these traits are
inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or
subjective distress do they constitute histrionic personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Histrionic personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge are attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. The disorder must also be distinguished from sjonptoms that
may develop in association with persistent substance use.


                             Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                   301.81 (F60.81)
A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and lack
of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated
by five (or more) of the following:
1. Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents,
    expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate achievements).
2. Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal
    love.
3. Believes that he or she is “special” and unique and can only be understood by, or
    should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions).
4. Requires excessive admiration.
5. Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially favorable
    treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations).
6. Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own
   ends).
7. Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others.
8. Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her.
9. Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes.


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of narcissistic personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of grandi­
osity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy that begins by early adulthood and is pres­
ent in a variety of contexts.
    Individuals with this disorder have a grandiose sense of self-importance (Criterion 1).
They routinely overestimate their abilities and inflate their accomplishments, often appearing
boastful and pretentious. They may blithely assume that others attribute the same value to
their efforts and may be surprised when the praise they expect and feel they deserve is not
forthcoming. Often implicit in the inflated judgments of their own accomplishments is an un­
derestimation (devaluation) of the contributions of others. Individuals with narcissistic per­
sonality disorder are often preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance,
beauty, or ideal love (Criterion 2). They may ruminate about "'long overdue" admiration and
privilege and compare themselves favorably with famous or privileged people.
    Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder believe that they are superior, spe­
cial, or unique and expect others to recognize them as such (Criterion 3). They may feel
that they can only be understood by, and should only associate with, other people who are
special or of high status and may attribute "unique," "perfect," or "gifted" qualities to those
with whom they associate. Individuals with this disorder believe that their needs are spe­
cial and beyond the ken of ordinary people. Their own self-esteem is enhanced (i.e., "mir­
rored") by the idealized value that they assign to those with whom they associate. They are
likely to insist on having only the "top" person (doctor, lawyer, hairdresser, instructor) or
being affiliated with the "best" institutions but may devalue the credentials of those who dis­
appoint them.
    Individuals with this disorder generally require excessive admiration (Criterion 4). Their
self-esteem is almost invariably very fragile. Tliey may be preoccupied with how well they
are doing and how favorably they are regarded by others. This often takes the form of a need
for constant attention and admiration. They may expect their arrival to be greeted with great
farifare and are astonished if others do not covet their possessions. They may constantly fish
for compliments, often with great charm. A sense of entitlement is evident in these individ­
uals' unreasonable expectation of especially favorable treatment (Criterion 5). They expect
to be catered to and are puzzled or furious when this does not happen. For example, they
may assume that they do not have to wait in line and that their priorities are so important
that others should defer to them, and then get irritated when others fail to assist "in their
very important work." This sense of entitlement, combined with a lack of sensitivity to the
wants and needs of others, may result in the conscious or unwitting exploitation of others
(Criterion 6). They expect to be given whatever they want or feel they need, no matter what
it might mean to others. For example, these individuals may expect great dedication from
others and may overwork them without regard for the impact on their lives. They tend to
form friendships or romantic relationships only if the other person seems likely to advance
their purposes or otherwise enhance their self-esteem. They often usuφ special privileges
and extra resources that they believe they deserve because they are so special.
    Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder generally have a lack of empathy and
have difficulty recognizing the desires, subjective experiences, and feelings of others (Crite­
rion 7). They may assume that others are totally concerned about their welfare. They tend to
discuss their own concerns in inappropriate and lengthy detail, while failing to recognize
that others also have feelings and needs. They are often contemptuous and impatient with
others who talk about their own problems and concerns. These individuals may be oblivious
to the hurt their remarks may inflict (e.g., exuberantly telling a former lover that "I am now
in the relationship of a lifetime!"; boasting of health in front of someone who is sick). When
recognized, the needs, desires, or feelings of others are likely to be viewed disparagingly as
signs of weakness or vulnerability. Those who relate to individuals with narcissistic person­
ality disorder typically find an emotional coldness and lack of reciprocal interest.
    These individuals are often envious of others or believe that oéiers are envious of them
(Criterion 8). They may begrudge others their successes or possessions, feeling that they better
deserve those achievements, admiration, or privileges. They may harshly devalue the contri­
butions of others, particularly when those individuals have received acknowledgment or
praise for their accomplishments. Arrogant, haughty behaviors characterize these individuals;
they often display snobbish, disdainful, or patronizing attitudes (Criterion 9). For example, an
individual with this disorder may complain about a clumsy waiter's "rudeness" or "stupidity"
or conclude a medical evaluation with a condescending evaluation of the physician.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Vulnerability in self-esteem makes individuals with narcissistic personality disorder very
sensitive to "injury" from criticism or defeat. Although they may not show it outwardly,
criticism may haunt these individuals and may leave them feeling humiliated, degraded,
hollow, and empty. They may react with disdain, rage, or defiant counterattack. Such ex­
periences often lead to social withdrawal or an appearance of humility that may mask and
protect the grandiosity. Interpersonal relations are typically impaired because of problems
derived from entitlement, the need for admiration, and the relative disregard for the sen­
sitivities of others. Though overweening ambition and confidence may lead to high
achievement, performance may be disrupted because of intolerance of criticism or defeat.
Sometimes vocational functioning can be very low, reflecting an unwillingness to take a
risk in competitive or other situations in which defeat is possible. Sustained feelings of
shame or humiliation and the attendant self-criticism may be associated with social with­
drawal, depressed mood, and persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) or major de­
pressive disorder. In contrast, sustained periods of grandiosity may be associated with a
hypomanie mood. Narcissistic personality disorder is also associated with anorexia ner­
vosa and substance use disorders (especially related to cocaine). Histrionic, borderline,
antisocial, and paranoid personality disorders may be associated with narcissistic person­
ality disorder.

Prevalence
Prevalence estimates for narcissistic personality disorder, based on DSM-IV definitions,
range from 0% to 6.2% in community samples.

Development and Course
Narcissistic traits may be particularly common in adolescents and do not necessarily in­
dicate that the individual will go on to have narcissistic personality disorder. Individuals
with narcissistic personality disorder may have special difficulties adjusting to the onset of
physical and occupational limitations that are inherent in the aging process.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Of those diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder, 50%-75% are male.

Differential Diagnosis
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with narcissistic personality disorder because they have certain features in
common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differ­
ences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features
that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to narcissistic person­
ality disorder, all can be diagnosed. The most useful feature in discriminating narcissistic
personality disorder from histrionic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders, in
which the interactive styles are coquettish, callous, and needy, respectively, is the grandi­
osity characteristic of narcissistic personality disorder. The relative stability of self-image
as well as the relative lack of self-destructiveness, impulsivity, and abandonment concerns
also help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from borderline personality disor­
der. Excessive pride in achievements, a relative lack of emotional display, and disdain for
others' sensitivities help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from histrionic
personality disorder. Although individuals with borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic
personality disorders may require much attention, those with narcissistic personality dis­
order specifically need that attention to be admiring. Individuals with antisocial and nar­
cissistic personality disorders share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial,
exploitative, and unempathic. However, narcissistic personality disorder does not neces­
sarily include characteristics of impulsivity, aggression, and deceit. In addition, individu­
als with antisocial personality disorder may not be as needy of the admiration and envy of
others, and persons with narcissistic personality disorder usually lack the history of con­
duct disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. In both narcissistic person­
ality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the individual may profess
a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others cannot do things as well. In con­
trast to the accompanying self-criticism of those with obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, individuals with narcissistic personality disorder are more likely to believe that
they have achieved perfection. Suspiciousness and social withdrawal usually distinguish
those with schizotypal or paranoid personality disorder from those with narcissistic per­
sonality disorder. When these qualities are present in individuals with narcissistic person­
ality disorder, they derive primarily from fears of having imperfections or flaws revealed.
    Many highly successful individuals display personality traits that might be considered
narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause
significant functional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute narcissistic per­
sonality disorder.
Mania or hypomania. Grandiosity may emerge as part of manic or hypomanie episodes,
but the association with mood change or functional impairments helps distinguish these
episodes from narcissistic personality disorder.
Substance use disorders. Narcissistic personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.




         Cluster C Personality Disorders

                                   Avoidant Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                      301.82 (F60.6)
A pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to neg­
ative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as in­
dicated by four (or more) of the following:
1. Avoids occupational activities that involve significant interpersonal contact because of
    fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection.
2. Is unwilling to get involved with people unless certain of being liked.
3. Shows restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of being shamed or
   ridiculed.     '
4. Is preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations.
5. Is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy.
6. Views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others.
7. Is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because
   they may prove embarrassing.


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of avoidant personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social inhi­
bition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation that begins by
early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
    Individuals with avoidant personality disorder avoid work activities that involve sig­
nificant interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection (Cri­
terion 1). Offers of job promotions may be declined because the new responsibilities might
result in criticism from co-workers. These individuals avoid making new friends unless
they are certain they will be liked and accepted without criticism (Criterion 2). Until they
pass stringent tests proving the contrary, other people are assumed to be critical and dis­
approving. Individuals with this disorder will not join in group activities unless there are
repeated and generous offers of support and nurturance. Interpersonal intimacy is often
difficult for these individuals, although they are able to establish intimate relationships
when there is assurance of uncritical acceptance. They may act with restraint, have diffi­
culty talking about themselves, and withhold intimate feelings for fear of being exposed,
ridiculed, or shamed (Criterion 3).
    Because individuals with this disorder are preoccupied with being criticized or re­
jected in social situations, they may have a markedly low threshold for detecting such re­
actions (Criterion 4). If someone is even slightly disapproving or critical, they may feel
extremely hurt. They tend to be shy, quiet, inhibited, and "invisible" because of the fear
that any attention would be degrading or rejecting. They expect that no matter what they
say, others will see it as "wrong," and so they may say nothing at all. They react strongly
to subtle cues that are suggestive of mockery or derision. Despite their longing to be active
participants in social life, they fear placing their welfare in the hands of others. Individuals
with avoidant personality disorder are inhibited in new interpersonal situations because
they feel inadequate and have low self-esteem (Criterion 5). Doubts concerning social
competence and personal appeal become especially manifest in settings involving inter­
actions with strangers. These individuals believe themselves to be socially inept, person­
ally unappealing, or inferior to others (Criterion 6). They are unusually reluctant to take
personal risks or to engage in any new activities because these may prove embarrassing
 (Criterion 7). They are prone to exaggerate the potential dangers of ordinary situations,
and a restricted lifestyle may result from their need for certainty and security. Someone
with this disorder may cancel a job interview for fear of being embarrassed by not dressing
appropriately. Marginal somatic symptoms or other problems may become the reason for
avoiding new activities.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with avoidant personality disorder often vigilantly appraise the movements
and expressions of those with whom they come into contact. Their fearful and tense de­
meanor may elicit ridicule and derision from others, which in turn confirms their self­
doubts. These individuals are very anxious about the possibility that they will react to crit­
icism with blushing or crying. They are described by others as being "shy," "timid,"
"lonely," and "isolated." The major problems associated with this disorder occur in social
and occupational functioning. The low self-esteem and hypersensitivity to rejection are
associated with restricted interpersonal contacts. These individuals may become relatively
isolated and usually do not have a large social support network that can help them weather
crises. They desire affection and acceptance and may fantasize about idealized relation­
ships with others. The avoidant behaviors can also adversely affect occupational function­
ing because these individuals try to avoid the types of social situations that may be
important for meeting the basic demands of the job or for advancement.
    Other disorders that are commonly diagnosed with avoidant personality disorder in­
clude depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders, especially social anxiety disorder (social
phobia). Avoidant personality disorder is often diagnosed with dependent personality
disorder, because individuals with avoidant personality disorder become very attached to
and dependent on those few other people with whom they are friends. Avoidant per­
sonality disorder also tends to be diagnosed with borderline personality disorder and with
the Cluster A personality disorders (i.e., paranoid, schizoid, or schizotypal personality
disorders).

Prevalence
Data from the 2001-2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Condi­
tions suggest a prevalence of about 2.4% for avoidant personality disorder.

Development and Course
The avoidant behavior often starts in infancy or childhood with shyness, isolation, and
fear of strangers and new situations. Although shyness in childhood is a common precur­
sor of avoidant personality disorder, in most individuals it tends to gradually dissipate as
they get older. In contrast, individuals who go on to develop avoidant personality disor­
der may become increasingly shy and avoidant during adolescence and early adulthood,
when social relationships with new people become especially important. There is some
evidence that in adults, avoidant personality disorder tends to become less evident or to
remit with age. This diagnosis should be used with great caution in children and adoles­
cents, for whom shy and avoidant behavior may be developmentally appropriate.

Culture-Related Diagnostic issues
There may be variation in the degree to which different cultural and ethnic groups regard
diffidence and avoidance as appropriate. Moreover, avoidant behavior may be the result
of problems in acculturation following immigration.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Avoidant personality disorder appears to be equally frequent in males and females.

Differential Diagnosis
Anxiety disorders. There appears to be a great deal of overlap between avoidant person­
ality disorder and social anxiety disorder (social phobia), so much so that they may be
alternative conceptualizations of the same or similar conditions. Avoidance also character­
izes both avoidant personality disorder and agoraphobia, and they often co-occur.
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with avoidant personality disorder because they have certain features in com­
mon. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences
in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that
meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to avoidant personality dis-
order, all can be diagnosed. Both avoidant personality disorder and dependent personal­
ity disorder are characterized by feelings of inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and
a need for reassurance. Although the primary focus of concern in avoidant personality
disorder is avoidance of humiliation and rejection, in dependent personality disorder the
focus is on being taken care of. However, avoidant personality disorder and dependent
personality disorder are particularly likely to co-occur. Like avoidant personality disor­
der, schizoid personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder are characterized
by social isolation. However, individuals with avoidant personality disorder want to have
relationships with others and feel their loneliness deeply, whereas those with schizoid or
schizotypal personality disorder may be content with and even prefer their social isola­
tion. Paranoid personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder are both character­
ized by a reluctance to confide in others. However, in avoidant personality disorder, this
reluctance is attributable more to a fear of being embarrassed or being found inadequate
than to a fear of others' malicious intent.
    Many individuals display avoidant personality traits. Only when these traits are in­
flexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or sub­
jective distress do they constitute avoidant personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Avoidant personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge are attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Avoidant personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.


                              Dependent Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                       301.6(F60.7)
A pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging
behavior and fears of separation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of
contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and
   reassurance from others.
2. Needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of his or her life.
3. Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support
   or approval. (Note: Do not include realistic fears of retribution.)
4. Has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on his or her own (because of a lack of
   self-confidence in judgment or abilities rather than a lack of motivation or energy).
5. Goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others, to the point
   of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant.
6. Feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of being
   unable to care for himself or herself.
7. Urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support when a close re­
   lationship ends.
8. Is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care of himself or herself.


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of dependent personality disorder is a pervasive and excessive need
to be taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation.
This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. The dependent
and submissive behaviors are designed to elicit caregiving and arise from a self-perception
of being unable to function adequately without the help of others.
    Individuals with dependent personality disorder have great difficulty making every­
day decisions (e.g., what color shirt to wear to work or whether to carry an umbrella) without
an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others (Criterion 1). These individu­
als tend to be passive and to allow other people (often a single other person) to take the ini­
tiative and assume responsibility for most major areas of their lives (Criterion 2). Adults
with this disorder typically depend on a parent or spouse to decide where they should
live, what kind of job they should have, and which neighbors to befriend. Adolescents
with this disorder may allow their parent(s) to decide what they should wear, with whom
they should associate, how they should spend their free time, and what school or college
they should attend. This need for others to assume responsibility goes beyond age-appro­
priate and situation-appropriate requests for assistance from others (e.g., the specific
needs of children, elderly persons, and handicapped persons). Dependent personality dis­
order may occur in an individual who has a serious medical condition or disability, but in
such cases the difficulty in taking responsibility must go beyond what would normally be
associated with that condition or disability.
    Because they fear losing support or approval, individuals with dependent personality
disorder often have difficulty expressing disagreement with other individuals, especially
those on whom they are dependent (Criterion 3). These individuals feel so unable to func­
tion alone that they will agree with things that they feel are wrong rather than risk losing
the help of those to whom they look for guidance. They do not get appropriately angry at
others whose support and nurturance they need for fear of alienating them. If the individ­
ual's concerns regarding the consequences of expressing disagreement are realistic (e.g.,
realistic fears of retribution from an abusive spouse), the behavior should not be consid­
ered to be evidence of dependent personality disorder.
    Individuals with this disorder have difficulty initiating projects or doing things inde­
pendently (Criterion 4). They lack self-confidence and believe that they need help to begin
and carry through tasks. They will wait for others to start things because they believe that
as a rule others can do them better. These individuals are convinced that they are incapable
of functioning independently and present themselves as inept and requiring constant as­
sistance. They are, however, likely to function adequately if given the assurance that some­
one else is supervising and approving. There may be a fear of becoming or appearing to be
more competent, because they may believe that this will lead to abandonment. Because
they rely on others to handle their problems, they often do not leam the skills of indepen­
dent living, thus perpetuating dependency.
    Individuals with dependent personality disorder may go to excessive lengths to obtain
nurturance and support from others, even to the point of volunteering for unpleasant
tasks if such behavior will bring the care they need (Criterion 5). They are willing to submit
to what others want, even if the demands are unreasonable. Their need to maintain an im­
portant bond will often result in imbalanced or distorted relationships. They may make ex­
traordinary self-sacrifices or tolerate verbal, physical, or sexual abuse. (It should be noted
that this behavior should be considered evidence of dependent personality disorder only
when it can clearly be established that other options are available to the individual.) Indi­
viduals with this disorder feel uncomfortable or helpless when alone, because of their ex­
aggerated fears of being unable to care for themselves (Criterion 6). They will "tag along"
with important others just to avoid being alone, even if they are not interested or involved
in what is happening.
     When a close relationship ends (e.g., a breakup with a lover; the death of a caregiver), in­
dividuals with dependent personality disorder may urgently seek another relationship to
provide the care and support they need (Criterion 7). Their belief that they are unable to
function in the absence of a close relationship motivates these individuals to become quickly
and indiscriminately attached to another individual. Individuals with this disorder are often
preoccupied with fears of being left to care for themselves (Criterion 8). They see themselves
as so totally dependent on the advice and help of an important other person that they worry
about being abandoned by that person when there are no grounds to justify such fears. To be
considered as evidence of this criterion, the fears must be excessive and unrealistic. For ex­
ample, an elderly man with cancer who moves into his son's household for care is exhibiting
dependent behavior that is appropriate given this person's life circumstances.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with dependent personality disorder are often characterized by pessimism
and self-doubt, tend to belittle their abilities and assets, and may constantly refer to them­
selves as "stupid." They take criticism and disapproval as proof of their worthlessness and
lose faith in themselves. They may seek overprotection and dominance from others. Oc­
cupational functioning may be impaired if independent initiative is required. They may
avoid positions of responsibility and become anxious when faced with decisions. Social re­
lations tend to be limited to those few people on whom the individual is dependent. There
may be an increased risk of depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and adjustment dis­
orders. Dependent personality disorder often co-occurs with other personality disorders,
especially borderline, avoidant, and histrionic personality disorders. Chronic physical ill­
ness or separation anxiety disorder in childhood or adolescence may predispose the indi­
vidual to the development of this disorder.

Prevalence
Data from the 2001-2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Condi­
tions yielded an estimated prevalence of dependent personality disorder of 0.49%, and de­
pendent personality was estimated, based on a probability subsample from Part II of the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication, to be 0.6%.

Deveiopment and Course
This diagnosis should be used with great caution, if at all, in children and adolescents, for
whom dependent behavior may be developmentally appropriate.

Culture-Reiated Diagnostic issues
The degree to which dependent behaviors are considered to be appropriate varies sub­
stantially across different age and sociocultural groups. Age and cultural factors need to
be considered in evaluating the diagnostic threshold of each criterion. Dependent behav­
ior should be considered characteristic of the disorder only when it is clearly in excess of
the individual's cultural norms or reflects unrealistic concerns. An emphasis on passivity,
politeness, and deferential treatment is characteristic of some societies and may be mis­
interpreted as traits of dependent personality disorder. Similarly, societies may differen­
tially foster and discourage dependent behavior in males and females.

Gender-Reiated Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, dependent personality disorder has been diagnosed more frequently in
females, although some studies report similar prevalence rates among males and females.

Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. Dependent personality disorder must
be distinguished from dependency arising as a consequence of other mental disorders (e.g.,
depressive disorders, panic disorder, agoraphobia) and as a result of other medical conditions.
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may be
confused with dependent personality disorder because they have certain features in com­
mon. It is therefore important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in
their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet cri­
teria for one or more personality disorders in addition to dependent personality disorder, all
can be diagnosed. Although many personality disorders are characterized by dependent
features, dependent personality disorder can be distinguished by its predominantly submis­
sive, reactive, and clinging behavior. Both dependent personality disorder and borderline
personality disorder are characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the individual
with borderline personality disorder reacts to abandonment with feelings of emotional emp­
tiness, rage, and demands, whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder re­
acts with increasing appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement
relationship to provide caregiving and support. Borderline personality disorder can further
be distinguished from dependent personality disorder by a typical pattern of unstable and
intense relationships. Individuals with histrionic personality disorder, like those with de­
pendent personality disorder, have a strong need for reassurance and approval and may ap­
pear childlike and clinging. However, unlike dependent personality disorder, which is
characterized by self-effacing and docile behavior, histrionic personality disorder is charac­
terized by gregarious flamboyance with active demands for attention. Both dependent
personality disorder and avoidant personality disorder are characterized by feelings of in­
adequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance; however, individuals
with avoidant personality disorder have such a strong fear of humiliation and rejection that
they withdraw until they are certain they will be accepted. In contrast, individuals with de­
pendent personality disorder have a pattern of seeking and maintaining connections to im­
portant others, rather than avoiding and withdrawing from relationships.
    Many individuals display dependent personality traits. Orüy when these traits are in­
flexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or sub­
jective distress do they constitute dependent personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Dependent personality disor­
der must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge are attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Dependent personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.


       Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                         301.4 (F60.5)
A pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and in-
teφersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, openness, and efficiency, beginning by
early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the
following:
1. Is preoccupied with details, rules, lists, order, organization, or schedules to the extent
    that the major point of the activity is lost.
2. Shows perfectionism that interferes with task completion (e.g., is unable to complete a
     project because his or her own overly strict standards are not met).
3. Is excessively devoted to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure activities and
    friendships (not accounted for by obvious economic necessity).
4. Is overconscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or
    values (not accounted for by cultural or religious identification).
5. Is unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects even when they have no sentimental
   value.
6. Is reluctant to delegate tasks or to work with others unless they submit to exactly his
   or her way of doing things.
7. Adopts a miserly spending style toward both self and others; money is viewed as
   something to be hoarded for future catastrophes.
8. Shows rigidity and stubbornness.


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is a preoccupation
with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of
flexibility, openness, and efficiency. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is present
in a variety of contexts.
    Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder attempt to maintain a
sense of control through painstaking attention to rules, trivial details, procedures, lists,
schedules, or form to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost (Criterion 1). They
are excessively careful and prone to repetition, paying extraordinary attention to detail
and repeatedly checking for possible mistakes. They are oblivious to the fact that other
people tend to become very annoyed at the delays and inconveniences that result from this
behavior. For example, when such individuals misplace a list of things to be done, they
will spend an inordinate amount of time looking for the list rather than spending a few
moments re-creating it from memory and proceeding to accomplish the tasks. Time is
poorly allocated, and the most important tasks are left to the last moment. The perfection­
ism and self-imposed high standards of performance cause significant dysfunction and
distress in these individuals. They may become so involved in making every detail of a
project absolutely perfect that the project is never finished (Criterion 2). For example, the
completion of a written report is delayed by numerous time-consuming rewrites that all
come up short of "perfection." Deadlines are missed, and aspects of the individual's life
that are not the current focus of activity may fall into disarray.
    Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder display excessive devotion
to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure activities and friendships (Criterion 3).
This behavior is not accounted for by economic necessity. They often feel that they do not
have time to take an evening or a weekend day off to go on an outing or to just relax. They
may keep postponing a pleasurable activity, such as a vacation, so that it may never occur.
When they do take time for leisure activities or vacations, they are very uncomfortable un­
less they have taken along something to work on so they do not "waste time." There may be
a great concentration on household chores (e.g., repeated excessive cleaning so that "one
could eat off the floor"). If they spend time with friends, it is likely to be in some kind of for­
mally organized activity (e.g., sports). Hobbies or recreational activities are approached as
serious tasks requiring careful organization and hard work to master. The emphasis is on
perfect performance. These individuals turn play into a structured task (e.g., correcting an
infant for not putting rings on the post in the right order; telling a toddler to ride his or her tri­
cycle in a straight line; turning a baseball game into a harsh "lesson").
    Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder may be excessively con­
scientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or values (Crite­
rion 4). They may force themselves and others to follow rigid moral principles and very
strict standards of performance. They may also be mercilessly self-critical about their own
mistakes. Individuals with this disorder are rigidly deferential to authority and rules and
insist on quite literal compliance, with no rule bending for extenuating circumstances. For
example, the individual will not lend a quarter to a friend who needs one to make a tele­
phone call because "neither a borrower nor a lender be" or because it would be "bad" for
the person's character. These qualities should not be accounted for by the individual's cul­
tural or religious identification.
    Individuals with this disorder may be unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects,
even when they have no sentimental value (Criterion 5). Often these individuals will ad­
mit to being "pack rats." They regard discarding objects as wasteful because "you never
know when you might need something" and will become upset if someone tries to get rid of
the things they have saved. Their spouses or roommates may complain about the amount of
space taken up by old parts, magazines, broken appliances, and so on.
    Individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are reluctant to delegate
tasks or to work with others (Criterion 6). They stubbornly and unreasonably insist that
everything be done their way and that people conform to their way of doing things. They
often give very detailed instructions about how things should be done (e.g., there is one
and only one way to mow the lawn, wash the dishes, build a doghouse) and are surprised
and irritated if others suggest creative alternatives. At other times they may reject offers of
help even when behind schedule because they believe no one else can do it right.
    Individuals with this disorder may be miserly and stingy and maintain a standard of
living far below what they can afford, believing that spending must be tightly controlled to
provide for future catastrophes (Criterion 7). Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
is characterized by rigidity and stubbornness (Criterion 8). Individuals with this disorder
are so concerned about having things done the one "correct" way that they have trouble
going along with anyone else's ideas. These individuals plan ahead in meticulous detail
and are unwilling to consider changes. Totally wrapped up in their own perspective, they
have difficulty acknowledging the viewpoints of others. Friends and colleagues may be­
come frustrated by this constant rigidity. Even when individuals with obsessive-compul­
sive personality disorder recognize that it may be in their interest to compromise, they
may stubbornly refuse to do so, arguing that it is "the principle of the thing."

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
When rules and established procedures do not dictate the correct answer, decision making
may become a time-consuming, often painful process. Individuals with obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder may have such difficulty deciding which tasks take pri­
ority or what is the best way of doing some particular task that they may never get started
on anything. They are prone to become upset or angry in situations in which they are not
able to maintain control of their physical or interpersonal environment, although the an­
ger is typically not expressed directly. For example, an individual may be angry when ser­
vice in a restaurant is poor, but instead of complaining to the management, the individual
ruminates about how much to leave as a tip. C3n other occasions, anger may be expressed
with righteous indignation over a seemingly minor matter. Individuals with this disorder
may be especially attentive to their relative status in dominance-submission relationships
and may display excessive deference to an authority they respect and excessive resistance
to authority they do not respect.
    Individuals with this disorder usually express affection in a highly controlled or stilted
fashion and may be very uncomfortable in the presence of others who are emotionally ex­
pressive. Their everyday relationships have a formal and serious quality, and they may be
stiff in situations in which others would smile and be happy (e.g., greeting a lover at the
airport). They carefully hold themselves back until they are sure that whatever they say
will be perfect. They may be preoccupied with logic and intellect, and intolerant of affec­
tive behavior in others. They often have difficulty expressing tender feelings, rarely pay­
ing compliments. Individuals with this disorder may experience occupational difficulties
and distress, particularly when confronted with new situations that demand flexibility
and compromise.
    Individuals with anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, social anx­
iety disorder (social phobia), and specific phobias, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
have an increased likelihood of having a personality disturbance that meets criteria for ob-
sessive-compulçive personality disorder. Even so, it appears that the majority of individ­
uals with OCD do not have a pattern of behavior that meets criteria for this personality
disorder. Many of the features of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder overlap with
"type A" personality characteristics (e.g., preoccupation with work, competitiveness, time
urgency), and these features may be present in people at risk for myocardial infarction.
There may be an association between obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and de­
pressive and bipolar disorders and eating disorders.

Prevalence
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is one of the most prevalent personality dis­
orders in the general population, with estimated prevalence ranging from 2.1% to 7.9%.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In assessing an individual for obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the clinician
should not include those behaviors that reflect habits, customs, or interpersonal styles that
are culturally sanctioned by the individual's reference group. Certain cultures place sub­
stantial emphasis on work and productivity; the resulting behaviors in members of those
societies need not be considered indications of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In systematic studies, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder appears to be diagnosed
about twice as often among males.

Differential Diagnosis
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Despite the similarity in names, OCD is usually easily
distinguished from obsessive-compulsive personality disorder by the presence of true ob­
sessions and compulsions in OCD. When criteria for both obsessive-compulsive person­
ality disorder and OCD are met, both diagnoses should be recorded.
Hoarding disorder. A diagnosis of hoarding disorder should be considered especially
when hoarding is extreme (e.g., accumulated stacks of worthless objects present a fire haz­
ard and make it difficult for others to walk through the house). When criteria for both ob­
sessive-compulsive personality disorder and hoarding disorder are met, both diagnoses
should be recorded.
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder because they have certain
features in common. It is, therefore, important to distinguish among these disorders based
on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality
features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with narcissistic per­
sonality disorder may also profess a commitment to perfectionism and believe that others
cannot do things as well, but these individuals are more likely to believe that they have
achieved perfection, whereas those with obsessive-compulsive personahty disorder are
usually self-critical. Individuals with narcissistic or antisocial personality disorder lack
generosity but will indulge themselves, whereas those with obsessive-compulsive person­
ality disorder adopt a miserly spending style toward both self and others. Both schizoid
personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder may be characterized
by an apparent formality and social detachment. In obsessive-compulsive personality dis­
order, this stems from discomfort with emotions and excessive devotion to work, whereas
in schizoid personality disorder there is a fundamental lack of capacity for intimacy.
    Obsessive-compulsive personality traits in moderation may be especially adaptive, par­
ticularly in situations that reward high performance. Only when these traits are inflexible,
maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective dis­
tress do they constitute obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Obsessive-compulsive person­
ality disorder must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical con­
dition, in which the traits emerge attributable to the effects of another medical condition
on the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder must also be dis­
tinguished from symptoms that may develop in association with persistent substance use.




             Other Personality Disorders

                                       Personality Change
                          Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria                                                      310.1 (F07.0)
A. A persistent personality disturbance that represents a change fronn the individual’s pre­
   vious characteristic personality pattern.
   Note: In children, the disturbance involves a marked deviation from normal devel­
   opment or a significant change in the child’s usual behavior patterns, lasting at least
   1 year.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
   disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (including another
   mental disorder due to another medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
   Labile type: If the predominant feature is affective lability.
   Disinhibited type: If the predominant feature is poor impulse control as evidenced by
   sexual indiscretions, etc.
   Aggressive type: If the predominant feature is aggressive behavior.
   Apathetic type: If the predominant feature is marked apathy and indifference.
   Paranoid type: If the predominant feature is suspiciousness or paranoid ideation.
   Other type: If the presentation is not characterized by any of the above subtypes.
   Combined type: If more than one feature predominates in the clinical picture.
    Unspecified type
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition (e.g., 310.1 [F07.0] person­
ality change due to temporal lobe epilepsy). The other medical condition should be coded
and listed separately immediately before the personality disorder due to another medical
condition (e.g., 345.40 [G40.209] temporal lobe epilepsy; 310.1 [F07.0] personality
change due to temporal lobe epilepsy).
Subtypes
The particular {Personality change can be specified by indicating the symptom presenta­
tion that predominates in the clinical presentation.

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a personality change due to another medical condition is a persis­
tent personality disturbance that is judged to be due to the direct pathophysiological ef­
fects of a medical condition. The personality disturbance represents a change from the
individual's previous characteristic personality pattern. In children, this condition may be
manifested as a marked deviation from normal development rather than as a change in a
stable personality pattern (Criterion A). There must be evidence from the history, physical
examination, or laboratory findings that the personality change is the direct physiological
consequence of another medical condition (Criterion B). The diagnosis is not given if the
disturbance is better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion C). The diagnosis is
not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion
D). The disturbance must also cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).
    Common manifestations of the personality change include affective instability, poor
impulse control, outbursts of aggression or rage grossly out of proportion to any precipi­
tating psychosocial stressor, marked apathy, suspiciousness, or paranoid ideation. The
phenomenology of the change is indicated using the subtypes listed in the criteria set. An
individual with the disorder is often characterized by others as "not himself [or herself]."
Although it shares the term "personality" with the other personality disorders, this diag­
nosis is distinct by virtue of its specific etiology, different phenomenology, and more vari­
able onset and course.
    The clinical presentation in a given individual may depend on the nature and localiza­
tion of the pathological process. For example, injury to the frontal lobes may yield symp­
toms such as lack of judgment or foresight, facetiousness, disinhibition, and euphoria.
Right hemisphere strokes have often been shown to evoke personality changes in asso­
ciation with unilateral spatial neglect, anosognosia (i.e., inability of the individual to
recognize a bodily or functional deficit, such as the existence of hemiparesis), motor im-
persistence, and other neurological deficits.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A variety of neurological and other medical conditions may cause personality changes,
including central nervous system neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease,
Huntington's disease, epilepsy, infectious conditions with central nervous system in­
volvement (e.g., HIV), endocrine conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypo- and hyperadre-
nocorticism), and autoimmune conditions with central nervous system involvement (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory
findings, and patterns of prevalence and onset reflect those of the neurological or other
medical condition involved.

Differentiai Diagnosis
Chronic medical conditions associated with pain and disability. Chronic medical con­
ditions associated with pain and disability can also be associated with changes in person­
ality. The diagnosis of personality change due to another medical condition is given only
if a direct pathophysiological mechanism can be established. This diagnosis is not given if
the change is due to a behavioral or psychological adjustment or response to another med­
ical condition (e.g., dependent behaviors that result from a need for the assistance of others
following a severe head trauma, cardiovascular disease, or dementia).
Delirium or major neurocognitive disorder. Personality change is a frequently associated
feature of a delirium or major neurocognitive disorder. A separate diagnosis of personal­
ity change due to another medical condition is not given if the change occurs exclusively
during the course of a delirium. However, the diagnosis of personality change due to an­
other medical condition may be given in addition to the diagnosis of major neurocognitive
disorder if the personality change is a prominent part of the clinical presentation.
Another mental disorder due to another medical condition. The diagnosis of person­
ality change due to another medical condition is not given if the disturbance is better ex­
plained by another mental disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., depressive
disorder due to brain tumor).
Substance use disorders. Personality changes may also occur in the context of substance
use disorders, especially if the disorder is long-standing. The clinician should inquire carefully
about the nature and extent of substance use. If the clinician wishes to indicate an etiological re­
lationship between the personality change and substance use, the unspecified category for the
specific substance (e.g., unspecified stimulant-related disorder) can be used.
Other mental disorders. Marked personality changes may also be an associated feature
of other mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia; delusional disorder; depressive and bipolar
disorders; other specified and unspecified disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and con­
duct disorders; panic disorder). However, in these disorders, no specific physiological fac­
tor is judged to be etiologically related to the personality change.
Other personality disorders. Personality change due to another medical condition can
be distinguished from a personality disorder by the requirement for a clinically significant
change from baseline personality functioning and the presence of a specific etiological
medical condition.


                       Other Specified Personality Disorder
                                                                           301.89 (F60.89)
This category applies to presentations in wliich symptoms characteristic of a personality
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the personality disorders diagnostic class. The other specified personality
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the
specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific personality
disorder. This is done by recording “other specified personality disorder” followed by the
specific reason (e.g., “mixed personality features”).



                               Unspecified Personality Disorder
                                                                               301.9 (F60.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a personality
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the personality disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified personality
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea­
son that the criteria are not met for a specific personality disorder, and includes presenta­
tions in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
                                                                 ParapKilic
                                                                 Disorders
Psrsphilic disorders included in this manual are voyeuristic disorder (spying on
others in private activities), exhibitionistic disorder (exposing the genitals), frotteuristic
disorder (touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual), sexual masochism
disorder (undergoing humiliation, bondage, or suffering), sexual sadism disorder (inflict­
ing humiliation, bondage, or suffering), pedophilic disorder (sexual focus on children), fe-
tishistic disorder (using nonliving objects or having a highly specific focus on nongenital
body parts), and transvestic disorder (engaging in sexually arousing cross-dressing).
These disorders have traditionally been selected for specific listing and assignment of ex­
plicit diagnostic criteria in DSM for two main reasons: they are relatively common, in re­
lation to other paraphilic disorders, and some of them entail actions for their satisfaction
that, because of their noxiousness or potential harm to others, are classed as criminal of­
fenses. The eight listed disorders do not exhaust the list of possible paraphilic disorders.
Many dozens of distinct paraphilias have been identified and named, and almost any of
them could, by virtue of its negative consequences for the individual or for others, rise to
the level of a paraphilic disorder. The diagnoses of the other specified and unspecified
paraphilic disorders are therefore indispensable and will be required in many cases.
    In this chapter, the order of presentation of the listed paraphilic disorders generally
corresponds to common classification schemes for these conditions. The first group of
disorders is based on anomalous activity preferences. These disorders are subdivided into
courtship disorders, which resemble distorted components of human courtship behavior
(voyeuristic disorder, exhibitionistic disorder, and frotteuristic disorder), and algolagnie
disorders, which involve pain and suffering (sexual masochism disorder and sexual sadism
disorder). The second group of disorders is based on anomalous target preferences. These
disorders include one directed at other humans (pedophilic disorder) and two directed
elsewhere (fetishistic disorder and transvestic disorder).
    The term paraphilia denotes any intense and persistent sexual interest other than sexual
interest in genital stimulation or preparatory fondling with phenotypically normal, phys­
ically mature, consenting human partners. In some circumstances, the criteria "intense
and persistent" may be difficult to apply, such as in the assessment of persons who are
very old or medically ill and who may not have "intense" sexual interests of any kind. In
such circumstances, the term paraphilia may be defined as any sexual interest greater than
or equal to normophilic sexual interests. There are also specific paraphilias that are gen­
erally better described as preferential sexual interests than as intense sexual interests.
    Some paraphilias primarily concern the individual's erotic activities, and others pri­
marily concern the individual's erotic targets. Examples of the former would include in­
tense and persistent interests in spanking, whipping, cutting, binding, or strangulating
another person, or an interest in these activities that equals or exceeds the individual's in­
terest in copulation or equivalent interaction with another person. Examples of the latter
would include intense or preferential sexual interest in children, corpses, or amputees (as
a class), as well as intense or preferential interest in nonhuman animals, such as horses or
dogs, or in inanimate objects, such as shoes or articles made of rubber.
    A paraphilic disorder is a paraphilia that is currently causing distress or impairment to the
individual or a paraphilia whose satisfaction has entailed personal harm, or risk of harm, to
others. A paraphilia is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for having a paraphilic dis­
order, and a paraphilia by itself does not necessarily justify or require clinical intervention.
    In the diagnostic criteria set for each of the listed paraphilic disorders. Criterion A specifies
the qualitative nature of the paraphilia (e.g., an erotic focus on children or on exposing tiie gen­
itals to strangers), and Criterion B specifies the negative consequences of the paraphilia (i.e.,
distress, impairment, or harm to others). In keeping with the distinction between paraphilias
and paraphilic disorders, the term diagnosis should be reserved for individuals who meet both
Criteria A and B (i.e., individuals who have a paraphilic disorder). If an individual meets Cri­
terion A but not Criterion B for a particular paraphilia—a circumstance that might arise when
a benign paraphilia is discovered during the clinical investigation of some other condition—
then the individual may be said to have that paraphilia but not a paraphilic disorder.
    It is not rare for an individual to manifest two or more paraphilias. In some cases, the para­
philic foci are closely related and the connection between the paraphilias is intuitively com­
prehensible (e.g., foot fetishism and shoe fetishism). In other cases, the connection between the
paraphilias is not obvious, and the presence of multiple paraphilias may be coincidental or else
related to some generalized vulnerability to anomalies of psychosexual development. In any
event, comorbid diagnoses of separate paraphilic disorders may be warranted if more than
one paraphilia is causing suffering to the individual or harm to others.
     Because of the two-pronged nature of diagnosing paraphilic disorders, clinician-rated
or self-rated measures and severity assessments could address either the strength of the
paraphilia itself or the seriousness of its consequences. Although the distress and impair­
ment stipulated in the Criterion B are special in being the immediate or ultimate result of
the paraphilia and not primarily the result of some other factor, the phenomena of reactive
depression, anxiety, guilt, poor work history, impaired social relations, and so on are not
unique in themselves and may be quantified with multipurpose measures of psychosocial
functioning or quality of life.
     The most widely applicable framework for assessing the strength of a paraphilia itself
is one in which examinees' paraphilic sexual fantasies, urges, or behaviors are evaluated in
relation to their normophilic sexual interests and behaviors. In a clinical interview or on
self-administered questionnaires, examinees can be asked whether their paraphilic sexual
fantasies, urges, or behaviors are weaker than, approximately equal to, or stronger than
their normophilic sexual interests and behaviors. This same type of comparison can be,
and usually is, employed in psychophysiological measures of sexual interest, such as pe­
nile plethysmography in males or viewing time in males and females.


                                                         Voyeuristic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                           302.82 (F65.3)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from observ­
   ing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in
   sexual activity, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
   sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
   occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
0. The individual experiencing the arousal and/or acting on the urges is at least 18 years
   of age.
Specify if:
   In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
    in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in voyeuristic behavior
    are restricted.
   In full remission: The individual lias not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per­
   son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar­
   eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.


Specifiers
The "in full remission" specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of
voyeurism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.

Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for voyeuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less
freely disclose this paraphilic interest and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal
from observing an unsuspecting person who is naked, disrobing, or engaged in sexual activity
despite substantial objective evidence to the contrary. If disclosing individuals also report dis­
tress or psychosocial problems because of their voyeuristic sexual preferences, they could be
diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. On the other hand, if they declare no distress, demon­
strated by lack of anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses and are
not impaired in other important areas of functioning because of tids sexual interest, and their
psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as
having voyeuristic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder.
    Nondisclosing individuals include, for example, individuals known to have been spy­
ing repeatedly on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual activity on
separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies concerning such sexual behavior,
and who may report that known episodes of watching unsuspecting naked or sexually ac­
tive persons were all accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of ob­
serving unsuspecting naked or sexually active persons but contest any significant or
sustained sexual interest in this behavior. Since these individuals deny having fantasies or
impulses about watching others nude or involved in sexual activity, it follows that they
would also reject feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by such impulses. De­
spite their nondisclosing stance, such individuals may be diagnosed with voyeuristic dis­
order. Recurrent voyeuristic behavior constitutes sufficient support for voyeurism (by
fulfilling Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated
behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling Criterion B).
    "Recurrent" spying on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual ac­
tivity (i.e., multiple victims, each on a separate occasion) may, as a general rule, be inter­
preted as three or more victims on separate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as
satisfying this criterion if there were multiple occasions of watching the same victim or if
there is corroborating evidence of a distinct or preferential interest in secret watching of
naked or sexually active unsuspecting persons. Note that multiple victims, as suggested
earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for diagnosis; the criteria may also be
met if the individual acknowledges intense voyeuristic sexual interest.
    The Criterion A time frame, indicating that signs or symptoms of voyeurism must have
persisted for at least 6 months, should also be understood as a general guideline, not a
strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspecting naked
or sexually active others is not merely transient.
    Adolescence and puberty generally increase sexual curiosity and activity. To alleviate
the risk of pathologizing normative sexual interest and behavior during pubertal adoles­
cence, the minimum age for the diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years (Criterion C).

Prevalence
Voyeuristic acts are the most common of potentially law-breaking sexual behaviors. The
population prevalence of voyeuristic disorder is unknown. However, based on voyeuris­
tic sexual acts in nonclinical samples, the highest possible lifetime prevalence for voyeuris­
tic disorder is approximately 12% in males and 4% in females.


Development and Course
Adult males with voyeuristic disorder often first become aware of their sexual interest in
secretly watching unsuspecting persons during adolescence. However, the minimum age
for a diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years because there is substantial difficulty in
differentiating it from age-appropriate puberty-related sexual curiosity and activity. The
persistence of voyeurism over time is unclear. Voyeuristic disorder, however, per defini­
tion requires one or more contributing factors that may change over time with or without
treatment: subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness),
psychiatric morbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual impulsivity; psychosocial impairment;
and/or the propensity to act out sexually by spying on unsuspecting naked or sexually ac­
tive persons. Therefore, the course of voyeuristic disorder is likely to vary with age.


Risk and Prognostic Factors
Iemperamental. Voyeurism is a necessary precondition for voyeuristic disorder; hence,
risk factors for voyeurism should also increase the rate of voyeuristic disorder.
Environmental. Childhood sexual abuse, substance misuse, and sexual preoccupation/
hypersexuality have been suggested as risk factors, although the causal relationship to
voyeurism is uncertain and the specificity unclear.


Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Voyeuristic disorder is very uncommon among females in clinical settings, while the male-
to-female ratio for single sexually arousing voyeuristic acts might be 3:1.


Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder. Conduct disorder in adolescents
and antisocial personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking
and antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspect­
ing others who are naked or engaging in sexual activity should be lacking.
Substance use disorders. Substance use disorders might involve single voyeuristic ep­
isodes by intoxicated individuals but should not involve the typical sexual interest in se­
cretly watching unsuspecting persons being naked or engaging in sexual activity. Hence,
recurrent voyeuristic sexual fantasies, urges, or behaviors that occur also when the indi­
vidual is not intoxicated suggest that voyeuristic disorder might be present.

Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in voyeuristic disorder are largely based on research with males
suspected of or convicted for acts involving the secret watching of unsuspecting nude or
sexually active persons. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals with
voyeuristic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with voyeuristic disorder include
hypersexuality and other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder. De­
pressive, bipolar, anxiety, and substance use disorders; attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder; and conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder are also frequent co-
morbid conditions.
                                                  Exhibitionistic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                          302.4 (F65.2)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the ex­
   posure of one’s genitals to an unsuspecting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges,
   or behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
   sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
   occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
   Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children
   Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to physically mature individuals
   Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children and to physically
   mature individuals
Specify if;
   In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in
   institutional or other settings where opportunities to expose one’s genitals are restricted.
   In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per­
   son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar­
   eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.


Subtypes
The subtypes for exhibitionistic disorder are based on the age or physical maturity of the non­
consenting individuals to whom the individual prefers to expose his or her genitals. The non­
consenting individuals could be prepubescent children, adults, or both. This specifier should
help draw adequate attention to characteristics of victims of individuals with exhibitionistic
disorder to prevent co-occurring pedophilic disorder from being overlooked. However, indi­
cations that the individual with exhibitionistic disorder is sexually attracted to exposing his or
her genitals to children should not preclude a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder.

Specifiers
The "in full remission" specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of ex­
hibitionism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.

Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for exhibitionistic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or
less freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who categorically deny any sexual attraction to
exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons despite substantial objective evidence to the
contrary. If disclosing individuals also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual
attractions or preferences for exposing, they may be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder. In
contrast, if they declare no distress (exemplified by absence of anxiety, obsessions, and guilt or
shame about these paraphilic impulses) and are not impaired by this sexual interest in other
important areas of functioning, and their self-reported, psychiatric, or legal histories indicate
that they do not act on them, they could be ascertained as having exhibitionistic sexual interest
but not be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder.
    Examples of nondisclosing individuals include those who have exposed themselves
repeatedly to unsuspecting persons on separate occasions but who deny any urges or fan­
tasies about such sexual behavior and who report that known episodes of exposure were
all accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of sexual behavior involv­
ing genital exposure but refute any significant or sustained sexual interest in such behav­
ior. Since these individuals deny having urges or fantasies involving genital exposure, it
follows that they would also deny feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by
such impulses. Such individuals may be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder despite
their negative self-report. Recurrent exhibitionistic behavior constitutes sufficient support
for exhibitionism (Criterion A) and simultaneously demonstrates that this paraphilically
motivated behavior is causing harm to others (Criterion B).
     "Recurrent" genital exposure to unsuspecting others (i.e., multiple victims, each on a
separate occasion) may, as a general rule, be interpreted as three or more victims on sep­
arate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion if there were
multiple occasions of exposure to the same victim, or if there is corroborating evidence of
a strong or preferential interest in genital exposure to unsuspecting persons. Note that
multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for di­
agnosis, as criteria may be met by an individual's acknowledging intense exhibitionistic
sexual interest with distress and/or impairment.
     The Criterion A time frame, indicating that signs or symptoms of exhibitionism must
have persisted for at least 6 months, should also be understood as a general guideline, not
a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in exposing one's genitals to unsuspect­
ing others is not merely transient. This might be expressed in clear evidence of repeated
behaviors or distress over a nontransient period shorter than 6 months.

Prevalence
The prevalence of exhibitionistic disorder is unknown. However, based on exhibitionistic
sexual acts in nonclinical or general populations, the highest possible prevalence for exhi­
bitionistic disorder in the male population is 2%-4%. The prevalence of exhibitionistic dis­
order in females is even more uncertain but is generally believed to be much lower than in
males.

Development and Course
Adult males with exhibitionistic disorder often report that they first became aware of sex­
ual interest in exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons during adolescence, at a
somewhat later time than the typical development of normative sexual interest in women
or men. Although there is no minimum age requirement for the diagnosis of exhibitionis­
tic disorder, it may be difficult to differentiate exhibitionistic behaviors from age-appro­
priate sexual curiosity in adolescents. Whereas exhibitionistic impulses appear to emerge
in adolescence or early adulthood, very little is known about persistence over time. By def­
inition, exhibitionistic disorder requires one or more contributing factors, which may
change over time with or without treatment; subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense
sexual frustration, loneliness), mental disorder comorbidity, hypersexuality, and sexual
impulsivity; psychosocial impairment; and/or the propensity to act out sexually by expos­
ing the genitals to unsuspecting persons. Therefore, the course of exhibitionistic disorder
is likely to vary with age. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associ­
ated with decreasing exhibitionistic sexual preferences and behavior.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Since exhibitionism is a necessary precondition for exhibitionistic dis­
order, risk factors for exhibitionism should also increase the rate of exhibitionistic disor­
der. Antisocial history, antisocial personality disorder, alcohol misuse, and pedophilic
sexual preference might increase risk of sexual recidivism in exhibitionistic offenders.
Hence, antisocial personality disorder, alcohol use disorder, and pedophilic interest may
be considered ri^k factors for exhibitionistic disorder in males with exhibitionistic sexual
preferences.
Environmental. Childhood sexual and emotional abuse and sexual preoccupation/hyper­
sexuality have been suggested as risk factors for exhibitionism, although the causal rela­
tionship to exhibitionism is uncertain and the specificity unclear.

Gender-Related Diagnostic issues
Exhibitionistic disorder is highly unusual in females, whereas single sexually arousing ex­
hibitionistic acts might occur up to half as often among women compared with men.

Functionai Consequences of Exiiibitionistic Disorder
The functional consequences of exhibitionistic disorder have not been addressed in re­
search involving individuals who have not acted out sexually by exposing their genitals to
unsuspecting strangers but who fulfill Criterion B by experiencing intense emotional dis­
tress over these preferences.

Differentiai Diagnosis
Potential differential diagnoses for exhibitionistic disorder sometimes occur also as co-
morbid disorders. Therefore, it is generally necessary to evaluate the evidence for exhibi­
tionistic disorder and other possible conditions as separate questions.
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder. Conduct disorder in adolescents
and antisocial personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and
antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in exposing the genitals should be lacking.
Substance use disorders. Alcohol and substance use disorders might involve single
exhibitionistic episodes by intoxicated individuals but should not involve the typical sex­
ual interest in exposing the genitals to unsuspecting persons. Hence, recurrent exhibition­
istic sexual fantasies, urges, or behaviors that occur also when the individual is not
intoxicated suggest that exhibitionistic disorder might be present.

Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in exhibitionistic disorder are largely based on research with indi­
viduals (almost all males) convicted for criminal acts involving genital exposure to non­
consenting individuals. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who
qualify for a diagnosis of exhibitionistic disorder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with
exhibitionistic disorder at high rates include depressive, bipolar, anxiety, and substance
use disorders; hypersexuality; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; other paraphilic
disorders; and antisocial personality disorder.


                                                      Frotteuristic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                      302.89 (F65.81)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from touching
   or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or be­
   haviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
   sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
   occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
   In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
   in institutional or other settings where opportunities to touch or rub against a noncon­
   senting person are restricted.
   In full remission: The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per­
   son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar­
   eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.


Specifiers
The "in remission" specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of frot-
teurism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted.

Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who relatively
freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who firmly deny any sexual attraction from touch­
ing or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual regardless of considerable objective evi­
dence to the contrary. If disclosing individuals also report psychosocial impairment due to
their sexual preferences for touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual, they
could be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress (demon­
strated by lack of anxiety, obsessions, guilt, or shame) about these paraphilic impulses and are
not impaired in other important areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their
psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they do not act on it, they could be ascertained as
having frotteuristic sexual interest but should not be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder.
    Nondisclosing individuals include, for instance, individuals known to have been
touching or rubbing against nonconsenting individuals on separate occasions but who
contest any urges or fantasies concerning such sexual behavior. Such individuals may re­
port that identified episodes of touching or rubbing against an unwilling individual were
all unintentional and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of touching or rubbing
against nonconsenting individuals but contest any major or persistent sexual interest in
this. Since these individuals deny having fantasies or impulses about touching or rubbing,
they would consequently reject feeling distressed or psychosocially impaired by such
impulses. Despite their nondisclosing position, such individuals may be diagnosed with
frotteuristic disorder. Recurrent frotteuristic behavior constitutes satisfactory support for
frotteurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and concurrently demonstrates that this paraphili-
cally motivated behavior is causing harm to others (by fulfilling Criterion B).
     "Recurrent" touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual (i.e., multiple vic­
tims, each on a separate occasion) may, as a general rule, be inteφreted as three or more vic­
tims on separate occasions. Fewer victims can be inteφreted as satisfying this criterion if
there were multiple occasions of touching or rubbing against the same unwilling individ­
ual, or corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in touching or rubbing
against nonconsenting individuals. Note that multiple victims are a sufficient but not a nec­
essary condition for diagnosis; criteria may also be met if the individual acknowledges in­
tense frotteuristic sexual interest with clinically significant distress and/or impairment.
    The Criterion A time frame, indicating that signs or symptoms of frotteurism must persist
for at least 6 months, should also be inteφreted as a general guideline, not a strict threshold, to
ensure that the sexual interest in touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual is not
transient. Hence, the duration part of Criterion A may also be met if there is clear evidence of
recurrent behaviors or distress over a shorter but nontransient time period.

Prevaience
Frotteuristic acts, including the uninvited sexual touching of or rubbing against another
individual, may occur in up to 30% of adult males in the general population. Approximately
10%-14% of adult males seen in outpatient settings for paraphilic disorders and hypersex­
uality have a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disorder. Hence,
whereas the population prevalence of frotteuristic disorder is unknown, it is not likely that
it exceeds the rate found in selected clinical settings.

Development and Course
Adult males with frotteuristic disorder often report first becoming aware of their sexual in­
terest in surreptitiously touching unsuspecting persons during late adolescence or emerging
adulthood. However, children and adolescents may also touch or rub against unwilling oth­
ers in the absence of a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder. Although there is no minimum age
for the diagnosis, frotteuristic disorder can be difficult to differentiate from conduct-disor­
dered behavior without sexual motivation in individuals at younger ages. The persistence of
frotteurism over time is unclear. Frotteuristic disorder, however, by definition requires one
or more contributing factors that may change over time with or without treatment: subjec­
tive distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration, loneliness); psychiatric morbidity;
hypersexuality and sexual impulsivity; psychosocial impairment; and/or the propensity to
act out sexually by touching or rubbing against unconsenting persons. Therefore, the course
of frotteuristic disorder is likely to vary with age. As with other sexual preferences, advanc­
ing age may be associated with decreasing frotteuristic sexual preferences and behavior.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Nonsexual antisocial behavior and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality
might be nonspecific risk factors, although the causal relationship to frotteurism is uncertain
and the specificity unclear. However, frotteurism is a necessary precondition for frotteuristic
disorder, so risk factors for frotteurism should also increase the rate of frotteuristic disorder.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
There appear to be substantially fewer females with frotteuristic sexual preferences than
males.

Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder. Conduct disorder in adolescents
and antisocial personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking
and antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in touching or rubbing against a
nonconsenting individual should be lacking.
Substance use disorders. Substance use disorders, particularly those involving stimu­
lants such as cocaine and amphetamines, might involve single frotteuristic episodes by in­
toxicated individuals but should not involve the typical sustained sexual interest in
touching or rubbing against unsuspecting persons. Hence, recurrent frotteuristic sexual
fantasies, urges, or behaviors that occur also when the individual is not intoxicated sug­
gest that frotteuristic disorder might be present.

Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in frotteuristic disorder are largely based on research with males
suspected of or convicted for criminal acts involving sexually motivated touching of or
rubbing against a nonconsenting individual. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply
to other individuals with a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder based on subjective distress
over their sexual interest. Conditions that occur comorbidly with frotteuristic disorder in­
clude hypersexuality and other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder
and voyeuristic disorder. Conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder, depressive
disorders, bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders also co-occur.
Potential differential diagnoses for frotteuristic disorder sometimes occur also as comor-
bid disorders. Therefore, it is generally necessary to evaluate the evidence for frotteuristic
disorder and possible comorbid conditions as separate questions.


                                      Sexual Masochism Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                    302.83 (F65.51)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the act
   of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or othenwise made to suffer, as manifested by fan­
   tasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impair­
   ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
   With asphyxiophilia: If the individual engages in the practice of achieving sexual
   arousal related to restriction of breathing.
Specify if:
   In a controlled environment: This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
   in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in masochistic sexual
   behaviors are restricted.
   In full remission: There has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational,
   or other areas of functioning for at last 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.


Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for sexual masochism disorder are intended to apply to individuals
who freely admit to having such paraphilic interests. Such individuals openly acknowl­
edge intense sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise
made to suffer, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors. If these individuals also re­
port psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual attractions or preferences for being
humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, they may be diagnosed with sex­
ual masochism disorder. In contrast, if they declare no distress, exemplified by anxiety, ob­
sessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses, and are not hampered by them
in pursuing other personal goals, they could be ascertained as having masochistic sexual
interest but should not be diagnosed with sexual masochism disorder.
    The Criterion A time frame, indicating that the signs or symptoms of sexual masoch­
ism must have persisted for at least 6 months, should be understood as a general guideline,
not a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in being humiliated, beaten, bound,
or otherwise made to suffer is not merely transient. However, the disorder can be diag­
nosed in the context of a clearly sustained but shorter time period.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The extensive use of pornography involving the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or oth­
erwise made to suffer is sometimes an associated feature of sexual masochism disorder.

Prevaience
The population prevalence of sexual masochism disorder is unknown. In Australia, it has
been estimated that 2.2% of males and 1.3% of females had been involved in bondage and
discipline, sadomasochism, or dominance and submission in the past 12 months.
