   Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
   Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief cannot
   be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g., referential delu­
   sions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).
Specify if:
   With bizarre content: Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible, not
   understandable, and not derived from ordinary life experiences (e.g., an individual’s be­
   lief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs and replaced them with some­
   one else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder:
   First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet­
   ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe­
   riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
   First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period dur­
   ing which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the de­
   fining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
   First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
   previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
   lUlultiple episodes, currently in acute episode
   Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
   Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
   Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
   remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be­
   ing very brief relative to the overall course.
   Unspecified
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be­
   havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
   severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
   to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
   Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.



Subtypes
In érotomanie type, the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with
the individual. The person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status
(e.g., a famous individual or a superior at work) but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to
contact the object of the delusion are common. In grandiose type, the central theme of the de­
lusion is the conviction of having some great talent or insight or of having made some im­
portant discovery. Less commonly, the individual may have the delusion of having a
special relationship with a prominent individual or of being a prominent person (in which
case the actual individual may be regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may
have a religious content. In jealous type, the central theme of the delusion is that of an un­
faithful partner. This belief is arrived at without due cause and is based on incorrect infer­
ences supported by small bits of "evidence" (e.g., disarrayed clothing). The individual
with the delusion usually confronts the spouse or lover and attempts to intervene in the
imagined infidelity. In persecutory type, the central theme of the delusion involves the in­
dividual's belief of being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned, mali­
ciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small slights
may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. The affected individual
may engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction by legal or legislative action. Indi­
viduals with persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to vio­
lence against those they believe are hurting them. In somatic type, the central theme of the
delusion involves bodily functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can occur in several
forms. Most common is the belief that the individual emits a foul odor; that there is an in­
festation of insects on or in the skin; that there is an internal parasite; that certain parts of
the body are misshapen or ugly; or that parts of the body are not functioning.

Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of delusional disorder is the presence of one or more delusions that
persist for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of delusional disorder is not given if
the individual has ever had a symptom presentation that met Criterion A for schizophre­
nia (Criterion B). Apart from the direct impact of the delusions, impairments in psychoso­
cial functioning may be more circumscribed than those seen in other psychotic disorders
such as schizophrenia, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd (Criterion C). If mood
episodes occur concurrently with the delusions, the total duration of these mood episodes
is brief relative to the total duration of the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions
are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another
medical condition (e.g., Alzheimer's disease) and are not better explained by another men­
tal disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder (Crite­
rion E).
    In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit­
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy­
chotic disorders.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of delusional dis­
order. Individuals with delusional disorder may be able to factually describe that others
view their beliefs as irrational but are unable to accept this themselves (i.e., there may be
"factual insight" but no true insight). Many individuals develop irritable or dysphoric
mood, which can usually be understood as a reaction to their delusional beliefs. Anger and
violent behavior can occur with persecutory, jealous, and érotomanie types. The individ­
ual may engage in htigious or antagonistic behavior (e.g., sending hundreds of letters of
protest to the government). Legal difficulties can occur, particularly in jealous and éroto­
manie types.

Prevaience
The lifetime prevalence of delusional disorder has been estimated at around 0.2%, and the
most frequent subtype is persecutory. Delusional disorder, jealous type, is probably more
common in males than in females, but there are no major gender differences in the overall
frequency of delusional disorder.

Deveiopment and Course
On average, global function is generally better than that observed in schizophrenia. Al­
though the diagnosis is generally stable, a proportion of individuals go on to develop
schizophrenia. Delusional disorder has a significant familial relationship with both
schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder. Although it can occur in younger age
groups, the condition may be more prevalent in older individuals.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
An individual's cultural and religious background must be taken into account in evaluat­
ing the possible presence of delusional disorder. The content of delusions also varies
across cultural contexts.

Functional Consequences of Delusional Disorder
The functional impairment is usually more circumscribed than that seen with other psy­
chotic disorders, although in some cases, the impairment may be substantial and include
poor occupational functioning and social isolation. When poor psychosocial functioning is
present, delusional beliefs themselves often play a significant role. A common character­
istic of individuals with delusional disorder is the apparent normality of their behavior
and appearance when their delusional ideas are not being discussed or acted on.

Differential Diagnosis
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. If an individual with obsessive-compul­
sive disorder is completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs
are true, then the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delu­
sional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder.
Similarly, if an individual with body dysmorphic disorder is completely convinced that
his or her body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmor­
phic disorder, with absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than
a diagnosis of delusional disorder.
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, psychotic disorder due to another medical con­
dition, and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Individuals with these
disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder. For example, sim­
ple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder would be di­
agnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance. A substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptom­
atology to delusional disorder but can be distinguished by the chronological relationship
of substance use to the onset and remission of the delusional beliefs.
Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder. Delusional disorder can be distinguished
from schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other character­
istic symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia.
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder. These disorders may
be distinguished from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood
disturbance and the delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions oc­
cur exclusively during mood episodes, the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features. Mood symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be su­
perimposed on delusional disorder. Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total
duration of all mood episodes remains brief relative to the total duration of the delusional
disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spec­
trum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by other specified depressive disorder,
unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and related disorder, or unspeci­
fied bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.
                                             Brief Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                          298.8 (F23)
A. Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must be
   (1), (2), or (3):
   1.   Delusions.
   2.   Hallucinations.
   3.   Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
   4.   Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
   Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response.
B. Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month, with
   eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder with
   psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or catatonia,
   and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
   a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
   With marked stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in response to
   events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
   circumstances in the individual’s culture.
   Without marited stressor(s): If symptoms do not occur in response to events that,
   singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circum­
   stances in the individual’s culture.
   With postpartum onset: If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks postpartum.
Specify if:
   With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis­
   order, pp. 119-120, for definition)
        Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with brief
        psychotic disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be­
   havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
   severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
   to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
   Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder can be made without using this severity
   specifier._____________________________________________________________


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of brief psychotic disorder is a disturbance that involves the sudden
onset of at least one of the following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, hallucina­
tions, disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence), or grossly abnormal
psychomotor behavior, including catatonia (Criterion A). Sudden onset is defined as
change from a nonpsychotic state to a clearly psychotic state within 2 weeks, usually with­
out a prodrome. An episode of the disturbance lasts at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
and the individual eventually has a full return to the premorbid level of functioning (Cri­
terion B). The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features, by schizoaffective disorder, or by schizophrenia and is not attributable
to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a hallucinogen) or another medical condi­
tion (e.g., subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
    In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit­
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy­
chotic disorders.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with brief psychotic disorder typically experience emotional turmoil or over­
whelming confusion. They may have rapid shifts from one intense affect to another.
Although the disturbance is brief, the level of impairment may be severe, and supervision
may be required to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and that the indi­
vidual is protected from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or act­
ing on the basis of delusions. There appears to be an increased risk of suicidal behavior,
particularly during the acute episode.

Prevaience
In the United States, brief psychotic disorder may account for 9% of cases of first-onset
psychosis. Psychotic disturbances that meet Criteria A and C, but not Criterion B, for brief
psychotic disorder (i.e., duration of active symptoms is 1-6 months as opposed to remis­
sion within 1 month) are more common in developing countries than in developed coun­
tries. Brief psychotic disorder is twofold more common in females than in males.

Deveiopment and Course
Brief psychotic disorder may appear in adolescence or early adulthood, and onset can oc­
cur across the lifespan, with the average age at onset being the mid 30s. By definition, a
diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder requires a full remission of all symptoms and an
eventual full return to the premorbid level of functioning within 1 month of the onset of the
disturbance. In some individuals, the duration of psychotic symptoms may be quite brief
(e.g., a few days).

Risic and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Preexisting personality disorders and traits (e.g., schizotypal person­
ality disorder; borderline personality disorder; or traits in the psychoticism domain, such
as perceptual dysregulation, and the negative affectivity domain, such as suspiciousness)
may predispose the individual to the development of the disorder.

Cuiture-Reiated Diagnostic issues
It is important to distinguish symptoms of brief psychotic disorder from culturally sanc­
tioned response patterns. For example, in some religious ceremonies, an individual may
report hearing voices, but these do not generally persist and are not perceived as abnormal
by most members of the individual's community. In addition, cultural and religious back­
ground must be taken into account when considering whether beliefs are delusional.

Functionai Consequences of Brief Psycliotic Disorder
Despite high rates of relapse, for most individuals, outcome is excellent in terms of social
functioning and symptomatology.
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. A variety of medical disorders can manifest with psychotic
symptoms of short duration. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or a de­
lirium is diagnosed when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or lab­
oratory tests that the delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological consequence
of a specific medical condition (e.g., Cushing's syndrome, brain tumor) (see 'Tsychotic
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition" later in this chapter).
Substance-related disorders. Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, sub­
stance-induced delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psychotic
disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin)
is judged to be etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see ''Substance/Medication-
Induced Psychotic Disorder" later in this chapter). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug
screen or a blood alcohol level, may be helpful in making this determination, as may a care­
ful history of substance use with attention to temporal relationships between substance in­
take and onset of the symptoms and to the nature of the substance being used.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be
made if the psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic
symptoms occur exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode).
Other psychotic disorders. If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the
diagnosis is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder
with psychotic features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or un­
specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder
and schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted be­
fore 1 month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention should
be given to the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute ex­
acerbations of schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
Malingering and factitious disorders. An episode of factitious disorder, with predomi­
nantly psychological signs and symptoms, may have the appearance of brief psychotic
disorder, but in such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced.
When malingering involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence
that the illness is being feigned for an understandable goal.
Personality disorders. In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial
stressors may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usu­
ally transient and do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at
least 1 day, an additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.


                                          Schizophreniform Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria                                                      295.40 (F20.81)
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
   1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2),
   or (3):
    1.   Delusions.
    2.   Hallucinations.
    3.   Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
    4.   Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
    5.   Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When the
   diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified as “provi­
   sional.”      '
C. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have
   been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred
   concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred dur­
   ing active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration
   of the active and residual periods of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
   drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
   With good prognostic features: This specifier requires the presence of at least two
   of the following features: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4 weeks of the
   first noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning; confusion or perplexity: good
   premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence of blunted or flat affect.
   W ithout good prognostic features: This specifier is applied if two or more of the
   above features have not been present.
Specify if:
   With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disor­
   der, pp. 119-120, for definition).
       Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with schizo­
       phreniform disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be­
   havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
   severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
   to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
   Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder can be made without using this severity
   specifier.

Note: For additional information on Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis, Develop­
ment and Course (age-related factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, Gender-Related
Diagnostic Issues, Differential Diagnosis, and Comorbidity, see the corresponding sec­
tions in schizophrenia.

Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophreniform disorder are identical to those of schizo­
phrenia (Criterion A). Schizophreniform disorder is distinguished by its difference in du­
ration: the total duration of the illness, including prodromal, active, and residual phases, is
at least 1 month but less than 6 months (Criterion B). The duration requirement for schizo­
phreniform disorder is intermediate between that for brief psychotic disorder, which lasts
more than 1 day and remits by 1 month, and schizophrenia, which lasts for at least 6 months.
The diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is made under two conditions. 1) when an ep­
isode of illness lasts between 1 and 6 months and the individual has already recovered,
and 2) when an individual is symptomatic for less than the 6 months' duration required for
the diagnosis of schizophrenia but has not yet recovered. In this case, the diagnosis should
be noted as "schizophreniform disorder (provisional)" because it is uncertain if the indi­
vidual will recover from the disturbance within the 6-month period. If the disturbance per­
sists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis should be changed to schizophrenia.
    Another distinguishing feature of schizophreniform disorder is the lack of a criterion
requiring impaired social and occupational functioning. While such impairments may po­
tentially be present, they are not necessary for a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder.
    In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit­
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy­
chotic disorders.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
As with schizophrenia, currently there are no laboratory or psychometric tests for schizo­
phreniform disorder. There are multiple brain regions where neuroimaging, neuropa-
thological, and neurophysiological research has indicated abnormalities, but none are
diagnostic.

Prevaience
Incidence of schizophreniform disorder across sociocultural settings is likely similar to
that observed in schizophrenia. In the United States and other developed countries, the in­
cidence is low, possibly fivefold less than that of schizophrenia. In developing countries,
the incidence may be higher, especially for the specifier ''with good prognostic features";
in some of these settings schizophreniform disorder may be as common as schizophrenia.

Deveiopment and Course
The development of schizophreniform disorder is similar to that of schizophrenia. About
one-third of individuals with an initial diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder (provi­
sional) recover within the 6-month period and schizophreniform disorder is their final di­
agnosis. The majority of the remaining two-thirds of individuals will eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.

Risic and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Relatives of individuals with schizophreniform disorder
have an increased risk for schizophrenia.

Functionai Consequences of
Sciiizophreniform Disorder
For the majority of individuals with schizophreniform disorder who eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the functional consequences are
similar to the consequences of those disorders. Most individuals experience dysfunction in
several areas of daily functioning, such as school or work, interpersonal relationships, and
self-care. Individuals who recover from schizophreniform disorder have better functional
outcomes.

Differentiai Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of mental and medical
conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms that must be considered in the differ­
ential diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. These include psychotic disorder due to
another medical condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder;
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or delirium; depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features; schizoaffective disorder; other specified or unspecified bi­
polar and related disorder; depressive or bipolar disorder with catatonic features; schizophre-
nia; brief psychotic disorder; delusional disorder; other specified or unspecified schizo­
phrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid
personality disorders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in childhood with
disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; obsessive-compulsive dis­
order; posttraumatic stress disorder; and traumatic brain injury.
    Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ
primarily in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophre­
nia also applies to schizophreniform disorder.
Brief psychotic disorder. Schizophreniform disorder differs in duration from brief psy­
chotic disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month.


                                                                      Schizophrenia
Diagnostic Criteria                                                           295.90 (F20.9)
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
   1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1 ), (2), or (3):
   1.   Delusions.
   2.   Hallucinations.
   3.   Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
   4.   Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
   5.   Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of function­
   ing in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, is
   markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood
   or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic,
   or occupational functioning).
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period
   must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Cri­
   terion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual
   symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may
   be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in Criterion
   A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
   have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have
   occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have
   occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the
   total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
   drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of child­
   hood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delu­
   sions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia,
   are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
   First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet­
   ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe­
   riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
   First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a period of time
   during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the
   defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
   First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
   previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
   Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be deter­
   mined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
   minimum of one relapse).
   ■Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
   Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
   Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
   remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be­
   ing very brief relative to the overall course.
   Unspecified
Specify if:
   With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
   pp. 119-120, for definition).
       Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
       schizophrenia to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be­
   havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
   severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
   to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
   Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of schizophrenia can be made without using this severity specifier.


Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia involve a range of cognitive, behavioral, and
emotional dysfunctions, but no single symptom is pathognomonic of the disorder. The di­
agnosis involves the recognition of a constellation of signs and symptoms associated with
impaired occupational or social functioning. Individuals with the disorder will vary sub­
stantially on most features, as schizophrenia is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome.
    At least two Criterion A symptoms must be present for a significant portion of time
during a 1-month period or longer. At least one of these symptoms must be the clear pres­
ence of delusions (Criterion Al), hallucinations (Criterion A2), or disorganized speech
(Criterion A3). Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior (Criterion A4) and negative
symptoms (Criterion A5) may also be present. In those situations in which the active-
phase symptoms remit within a month in response to treatment. Criterion A is still met if the
clinician estimates that they would have persisted in the absence of treatment.
    Schizophrenia involves impairment in one or more major areas of functioning (Crite­
rion B). If the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of func­
tion is not attained. Comparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful. The
dysfunction persists for a substantial period during the course of the disorder and does not
appear to be a direct result of any single feature. Avolition (i.e., reduced drive to pursue
goal-directed behavior; Criterion A5) is linked to the social dysfunction described under
Criterion B. There is also strong evidence for a relationship between cognitive impairment
(see the section "Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis" for this disorder) and func­
tional impairment in individuals with schizophrenia.
    Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least 6 months
(Criterion C). Pi;odromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symp­
toms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or
delusions. Individuals may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that are not of de­
lusional proportions (e.g., ideas of reference or magical thinking); they may have unusual
perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing the presence of an unseen person); their speech may
be generally understandable but vague; and their behavior may be unusual but not grossly
disorganized (e.g., mumbling in public). Negative symptoms are common in the pro­
dromal and residual phases and can be severe. Individuals who had been socially active
may become withdrawn from previous routines. Such behaviors are often the first sign of
a disorder.
    Mood symptoms and full mood episodes are common in schizophrenia and may be con­
current with active-phase symptomatology. However, as distinct from a psychotic mood dis­
order, a schizophrenia diagnosis requires the presence of delusions or hallucinations in the
absence of mood episodes. In addition, mood episodes, taken in total, should be present for
only a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
    In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit­
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy­
chotic disorders.


Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., laughing in the ab­
sence of an appropriate stimulus); a dysphoric mood that can take the form of depression,
anxiety, or anger; a disturbed sleep pattern (e.g., daytime sleeping and nighttime activity);
and a lack of interest in eating or food refusal. Depersonalization, derealization, and so­
matic concerns may occur and sometimes reach delusional proportions. Anxiety and pho­
bias are common. Cognitive deficits in schizophrenia are conrmion and are strongly linked
to vocational and functional impairments. These deficits can include decrements in declar­
ative memory, working memory, language function, and other executive functions, as well
as slower processing speed. Abnormalities in sensory processing and inhibitory capacity,
as well as reductions in attention, are also found. Some individuals with schizophrenia
show social cognition deficits, including deficits in the ability to infer the intentions of
other people (theory of mind), and may attend to and then inteφret irrelevant events or
stimuli as meaningful, perhaps leading to the generation of explanatory delusions. These
impairments frequently persist during symptomatic remission.
    Some individuals with psychosis may lack insight or awareness of their disorder (i.e.,
anosognosia). This lack of "'insight" includes unawareness of symptoms of schizophrenia
and may be present throughout the entire course of the illness. Unawareness of illness is
typically a symptom of schizophrenia itself rather than a coping strategy. It is comparable
to the lack of awareness of neurological deficits following brain damage, termed anoso­
gnosia. This symptom is the most common predictor of non-adherence to treatment, and it
predicts higher relapse rates, increased number of involuntary treatments, poorer psycho­
social functioning, aggression, and a poorer course of illness.
    Hostility and aggression can be associated with schizophrenia, although spontaneous
or random assault is uncommon. Aggression is more frequent for younger males and for
individuals with a past history of violence, non-adherence with treatment, substance
abuse, and impulsivity. It should be noted that the vast majority of persons with schizo­
phrenia are not aggressive and are more frequently victimized than are individuals in the
general population.
    Currently, there are no radiological, laboratory, or psychometric tests for the disorder.
Differences are evident in multiple brain regions between groups of healthy individuals
and persons with schizophrenia, including evidence from neuroimaging, neuropatholog-
ical, and neurophysiological studies. Differences are also evident in cellular architecture,
white matter connectivity, and gray matter volume in a variety of regions such as the pre-
frontal and temporal cortices. Reduced overall brain volume has been observed, as well as
increased brain volume reduction with age. Brain volume reductions with age are more
pronounced in individuals with schizophrenia than in healthy individuals. Finally, indi­
viduals with schizophrenia appear to differ from individuals without the disorder in eye-
tracking and electrophysiological indices.
    Neurological soft signs common in individuals with schizophrenia include impairments
in motor coordination, sensory integration, and motor sequencing of complex movements;
left-right confusion; and disinhibition of associated movements. In addition, minor phys­
ical anomalies of the face and limbs may occur.

Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia appears to be approximately 0.3%-0.7%, al­
though there is reported variation by race/ethnicity, across countries, and by geographic
origin for immigrants and children of immigrants. The sex ratio differs across samples and
populations: for example, an emphasis on negative symptoms and longer duration of dis­
order (associated with poorer outcome) shows higher incidence rates for males, whereas
definitions allowing for the inclusion of more mood symptoms and brief presentations
(associated with better outcome) show equivalent risks for both sexes.

Development and Course
The psychotic features of schizophrenia typically emerge between the late teens and the
mid-30s; onset prior to adolescence is rare. The peak age at onset for the first psychotic ep­
isode is in the early- to mid-20s for males and in the late-20s for females. The onset may be
abrupt or insidious, but the majority of individuals manifest a slow and gradual develop­
ment of a variety of clinically significant signs and symptoms. Half of these individuals
complain of depressive symptoms. Earlier age at onset has traditionally been seen as a pre­
dictor of worse prognosis. However, the effect of age at onset is likely related to gender,
with males having worse premorbid adjustment, lower educational achievement, more
prominent negative symptoms and cognitive impairment, and in general a worse out­
come. Impaired cognition is common, and alterations in cognition are present during de­
velopment and precede the emergence of psychosis, taking the form of stable cognitive
impairments during adulthood. Cognitive impairments may persist when other symptoms
are in remission and contribute to the disability of the disease.
    The predictors of course and outcome are largely unexplained, and course and outcome
may not be reliably predicted. The course appears to be favorable in about 20% of those
with schizophrenia, and a small number of individuals are reported to recover completely.
However, most individuals with schizophrenia still require formal or informal daily living
supports, and many remain chronically ill, with exacerbations and remissions of active
symptoms, while others have a course of progressive deterioration.
    Psychotic symptoms tend to diminish over the life course, perhaps in association with
normal age-related declines in dopamine activity. Negative symptoms are more closely re­
lated to prognosis than are positive symptoms and tend to be the most persistent. Further­
more, cognitive deficits associated with the illness may not improve over the course of the
illness.
    The essential features of schizophrenia are the same in childhood, but it is more diffi­
cult to make the diagnosis. In children, delusions and hallucinations may be less elaborate
than in adults, and visual hallucinations are more common and should be distinguished
from normal fantasy play. Disorganized speech occurs in many disorders with childhood
onset (e.g., autism spectrum disorder), as does disorganized behavior (e.g., attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder). These symptoms should not be attributed to schizophrenia with­
out due consideration of the more common disorders of childhood. Childhood-onset cases
tend to resemble poor-outcome adult cases, with gradual onset and prominent negative
symptoms. Children who later receive the diagnosis of schizophrenia are more likely to
have experienced nonspecific emotional-behavioral disturbances and psychopathology,
intellectual and language alterations, and subtle motor delays.
    Late-onset cases (i.e., onset after age 40 years) are overrepresented by females, who
may have married. Often, the course is characterized by a predominance of psychotic
symptoms with preservation of affect and social functioning. Such late-onset cases can still
meet the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, but it is not yet clear whether this is the
same condition as schizophrenia diagnosed prior to mid-life (e.g., prior to age 55 years).

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Season of birth has been linked to the incidence of schizophrenia, in­
cluding late winter/early spring in some locations and summer for the deficit form of the
disease. The incidence of schizophrenia and related disorders is higher for children grow­
ing up in an urban environment and for some minority ethnic groups.
Genetic and physiological. There is a strong contribution for genetic factors in deter­
mining risk for schizophrenia, although most individuals who have been diagnosed with
schizophrenia have no family history of psychosis. Liability is conferred by a spectrum of
risk alleles, common and rare, with each allele contributing only a small fraction to the to­
tal population variance. The risk alleles identified to date are also associated with other
mental disorders, including bipolar disorder, depression, and autism spectrum disorder.
    Pregnancy and birth complications with hypoxia and greater paternal age are associated
with a higher risk of schizophrenia for the developing fetus. In addition, other prenatal
and perinatal adversities, including stress, infection, malnutrition, maternal diabetes, and
other medical conditions, have been linked with schizophrenia. However, the vast major­
ity of offspring with these risk factors do not develop schizophrenia.

Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual
and the clinician do not share the same cultural and socioeconomic background. Ideas that
appear to be delusional in one culture (e.g., witchcraft) may be commonly held in another.
In some cultures, visual or auditory hallucinations with a religious content (e.g., hearing
God's voice) are a normal part of religious experience. In addition, the assessment of dis­
organized speech may be made difficult by linguistic variation in narrative styles across
cultures. The assessment of affect requires sensitivity to differences in styles of emotional
expression, eye contact, and body language, which vary across cultures. If the assessment
is conducted in a language that is different from the individual's primary language, care
must be taken to ensure that alogia is not related to linguistic barriers. In certain cultures,
distress may take the form of hallucinations or pseudo-hallucinations and overvalued
ideas that may present clinically similar to true psychosis but are normative to the pa­
tient's subgroup.

Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
A number of features distinguish the clinical expression of schizophrenia in females and
males. The general incidence of schizophrenia tends to be slightly lower in females, par­
ticularly among treated cases. The age at onset is later in females, with a second mid-life
peak as described earlier (see the section "Development and Course" for this disorder).
Symptoms tend to be more affect-laden among females, and there are more psychotic
symptoms, as well as a greater propensity for psychotic symptoms to worsen in later life.
Other symptom differences include less frequent negative symptoms and disorganization.
Finally, social functioning tends to remain better preserved in females. There are, how­
ever, frequent exceptions to these general caveats.

Suicide Risic
Approximately 5%-6% of individuals with schizophrenia die by suicide, about 20% attempt
suicide on one or more occasions, and many more have significant suicidal ideation. Suicidal
behavior is sometimes in response to command hallucinations to harm oneself or others.
Suicide risk remains high over the whole lifespan for males and females, although it may be
especially high for younger males with comorbid substance use. Other risk factors include
having depressive symptoms or feelings of hopelessness and being unemployed, and the
risk is higher, also, in the period after a psychotic episode or hospital discharge.

Functional Consequences of Schizoplirenia
Schizophrenia is associated with significant social and occupational dysfunction. Making
educational progress and maintaining employment are frequently impaired by avolition
or other disorder manifestations, even when the cognitive skills are sufficient for the tasks
at hand. Most individuals are employed at a lower level than their parents, and most, par­
ticularly men, do not marry or have limited social contacts outside of their family.

Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features. The distinc­
tion between schizophrenia and major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features or with catatonia depends on the temporal relationship between the mood distur­
bance and the psychosis, and on the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If de­
lusions or hallucinations occur exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode,
the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features.
Schizoaffective disorder. A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major
depressive or manic episode occur concurrently with the active-phase symptoms and that
the mood symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder. These disorders are of shorter
duration than schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symp­
toms. In schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in
brief psychotic disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
Delusional disorder. Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by
the absence of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prom­
inent auditory or visual hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or cata­
tonic behavior, negative symptoms).
Schizotypal personality disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished
from schizophrenia by subthreshold symptoms that are associated with persistent person­
ality features.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder. Individuals with
obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder may present with poor or
absent insight, and the preoccupations may reach delusional proportions. But these
disorders are distinguished from schizophrenia by their prominent obsessions, compul­
sions, preoccupations with appearance or body odor, hoarding, or body-focused repeti­
tive behaviors.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Posttraumatic stress disorder may include flashbacks that
have a hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilance may reach paranoid proportions. But a trau-
matic event and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event
are required to make the diagnosis.
Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders. These disorders may also have
symptoms resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective defi­
cits in social interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and
communication deficits. An individual v^ith autism spectrum disorder or communication
disorder must have symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, w^ith prominent
hallucinations or delusions for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophre­
nia as a comorbid condition.
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode. The diagnosis of schizo­
phrenia is made only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a de­
lirium or major or minor neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent
with those disorders. Individuals with substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder
may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia, but the sub­
stance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the chron­
ological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the psychosis in the
absence of substance use.

Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity with substance-related disorders are high in schizophrenia. Over
half of individuals with schizophrenia have tobacco use disorder and smoke cigarettes
regularly. Comorbidity with anxiety disorders is increasingly recognized in schizophre­
nia. Rates of obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder are elevated in individuals
with schizophrenia compared with the general population. Schizotypal or paranoid per­
sonality disorder may sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
    Life expectancy is reduced in individuals with schizophrenia because of associated
medical conditions. Weight gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular and
pulmonary disease are more common in schizophrenia than in the general population.
Poor engagement in health maintenance behaviors (e.g., cancer screening, exercise) in­
creases the risk of chronic disease, but other disorder factors, including medications, life­
style, cigarette smoking, and diet, may also play a role. A shared vulnerability for
psychosis and medical disorders may explain some of the medical comorbidity of schizo­
phrenia.


                                             Schizoaffective Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode (major
   depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.
   Note: The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1 : Depressed mood.
B. Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood epi­
   sode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness.
C. Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the majority of
   the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
   a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
   295.70 (F25.0) Bipolar type: This subtype applies if a manic episode is part of the pre­
   sentation. Major depressive episodes may also occur.
   295.70 (F25.1) Depressive type: This subtype applies if only major depressive epi­
   sodes are part of the presentation.
Specify if:
   With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
   pp. 119-120, for definition).
       Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
       schizoaffective disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
   First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet­
   ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe­
   riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
   First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period dur­
   ing which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the de­
   fining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
   First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
   previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
   Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be deter­
   mined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
   minimum of one relapse).
   Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
   Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
   Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
   remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be­
   ing very brief relative to the overall course.
   Unspecified
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be­
   havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
   severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
   to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
   Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder can be made without using this severity
   specifier.

Note: For additional information on Development and Course (age-related factors). Risk
and Prognostic Factors (environmental risk factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,
and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues, see the corresponding sections in schizophrenia,
bipolar I and II disorders, and major depressive disorder in their respective chapters.

Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is based on the assessment of an uninterrupted
period of illness during which the individual continues to display active or residual symp­
toms of psychotic illness. The diagnosis is usually, but not necessarily, made during the
period of psychotic illness. At some time during the period. Criterion A for schizophrenia
has to be met. Criteria B (social dysfunction) and F (exclusion of autism spectrum disorder
or other commimication disorder of childhood onset) for schizophrenia do not have to be
met. In addition to meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia, there is a major mood episode
(major depressive or manic) (Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder). Because loss of in­
terest or pleasure is common in schizophrenia, to meet Criterion A for schizoaffective dis­
order, the major depressive episode must include pervasive depressed mood (i.e., the
presence of markedly diminished interest or pleasure is not sufficient). Episodes of de­
pression or mania are present for the majority of the total duration of the illness (i.e., after
Criterion A has been met) (Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder). To separate schizoaf­
fective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, delusions
or hallucinations must be present for at least 2 w^eeks in the absence of a major mood epi­
sode (depressive or manic) at some point during the lifetime duration of the illness (Cri­
terion B for schizoaffective disorder). The symptoms must not be attributable to the effects
of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion D for schizoaffective disorder).
    Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder specifies that mood symptoms meeting criteria
for a major mood episode must be present for the majority of the total duration of the ac­
tive and residual portion of the illness. Criterion C requires the assessment of mood symp­
toms for the entire course of a psychotic illness, which differs from the criterion in DSM-IV,
which required only an assessment of the current period of illness. If the mood symptoms
are present for only a relatively brief period, the diagnosis is schizophrenia, not schizoaf­
fective disorder. When deciding whether an individual's presentation meets Criterion C,
the clinician should review the total duration of psychotic illness (i.e., both active and re­
sidual symptoms) and determine when significant mood symptoms (untreated or in need
of treatment with antidepressant and/or mood-stabilizing medication) accompanied the
psychotic symptoms. This determination requires sufficient historical information and
clinical judgment. For example, an individual with a 4-year history of active and residual
symptoms of schizophrenia develops depressive and manic episodes that, taken together,
do not occupy more than 1 year during the 4-year history of psychotic illness. This presen­
tation would not meet Criterion C.
    In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit­
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy­
chotic disorders.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Occupational functioning is frequently impaired, but this is not a defining criterion (in
contrast to schizophrenia). Restricted social contact and difficulties with self-care are as­
sociated with schizoaffective disorder, but negative symptoms may be less severe and less
persistent than those seen in schizophrenia. Anosognosia (i.e., poor insight) is also com­
mon in schizoaffective disorder, but the deficits in insight may be less severe and perva­
sive than those in schizophrenia. Individuals with schizoaffective disorder may be at
increased risk for later developing episodes of major depressive disorder or bipolar disor­
der if mood symptoms continue following the remission of symptoms meeting Criterion A
for schizophrenia. There may be associated alcohol and other substance-related disorders.
    There are no tests or biological measures that can assist in making the diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder. Whether schizoaffective disorder differs from schizophrenia
with regard to associated features such as structural or functional brain abnormalities,
cognitive deficits, or genetic risk factors is not clear.

Prevalence
Schizoaffective disorder appears to be about one-third as common as schizophrenia. Life­
time prevalence of schizoaffective disorder is estimated to be 0.3%. The incidence of
schizoaffective disorder is higher in females than in males, mainly due to an increased in­
cidence of the depressive type among females.

Development and Course
The typical age at onset of schizoaffective disorder is early adulthood, although onset can
occur anywhere from adolescence to late in life. A significant number of individuals diag­
nosed with another psychotic illness initially will receive the diagnosis schizoaffective dis­
order later when the pattern of mood episodes has become more apparent. With the
current diagnostic Criterion C, it is expected that the diagnosis for some individuals will
convert from schizoaffective disorder to another disorder as mood symptoms become less
prominent. The prognosis for schizoaffective disorder is somewhat better than the prog­
nosis for schizophrenia but worse than the prognosis for mood disorders.
    Schizoaffective disorder may occur in a variety of temporal patterns. The following is
a typical pattern: An individual may have pronounced auditory hallucinations and per­
secutory delusions for 2 months before the onset of a prominent major depressive episode.
The psychotic symptoms and the full major depressive episode are then present for 3 months.
Then, the individual recovers completely from the major depressive episode, but the psy­
chotic symptoms persist for another month before they too disappear. During this period
of illness, the individual's symptoms concurrently met criteria for a major depressive ep­
isode and Criterion A for schizophrenia, and during this same period of illness, auditory
hallucinations and delusions were present both before and after the depressive phase. The
total period of illness lasted for about 6 months, with psychotic symptoms alone present
during the initial 2 months, both depressive and psychotic symptoms present during the
next 3 months, and psychotic symptoms alone present during the last month. In this in­
stance, the duration of the depressive episode was not brief relative to the total duration of
the psychotic disturbance, and thus the presentation qualifies for a diagnosis of schizoaf­
fective disorder.
    The expression of psychotic symptoms across the lifespan is variable. Depressive or
manic symptoms can occur before the onset of psychosis, during acute psychotic episodes,
during residual periods, and after cessation of psychosis. For example, an individual
might present with prominent mood symptoms during the prodromal stage of schizo­
phrenia. This pattern is not necessarily indicative of schizoaffective disorder, since it is the
co-occurrence of psychotic and mood symptoms that is diagnostic. For an individual with
symptoms that clearly meet the criteria for schizoaffective disorder but who on further fol­
low-up only presents with residual psychotic symptoms (such as subthreshold psychosis
and/or prominent negative symptoms), the diagnosis may be changed to schizophrenia,
as the total proportion of psychotic illness compared with mood symptoms becomes more
prominent. Schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type, may be more common in young adults,
whereas schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, may be more common in older adults.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Among individuals with schizophrenia, there may be an in­
creased risk for schizoaffective disorder in first-degree relatives. The risk for schizoaffec­
tive disorder may be increased among individuals who have a first-degree relative with
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or schizoaffective disorder.

Culture-Reiated Diagnostic Issues
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual
and the clinician do not share the same cultural and economic background. Ideas that ap­
pear to be delusional in one culture (e.g., witchcraft) may be commonly held in another.
There is also some evidence in the literature for the overdiagnosis of schizophrenia com­
pared with schizoaffective disorder in African American and Hispanic populations, so
care must be tal^en to ensure a culturally appropriate evaluation that includes both psy­
chotic and affective symptoms.

Suicide Risic
The lifetime risk of suicide for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder is 5%, and the
presence of depressive symptoms is correlated w^ith a higher risk for suicide. There is ev­
idence that suicide rates are higher in North American populations than in European,
Eastern European, South American, and Indian populations of individuals with schizo­
phrenia or schizoaffective disorder.

Functional Consequences of Scliizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder is associated with social and occupational dysfunction, but dys­
function is not a diagnostic criterion (as it is for schizophrenia), and there is substantial
variability between individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder.

Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of psychiatric and med­
ical conditions can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms that must be considered
in the differential diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. These include psychotic disorder
due to another medical condition; delirium; major neurocognitive disorder; substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocognitive disorder; bipolar disorders
with psychotic features; major depressive disorder with psychotic features; depressive or
bipolar disorders with catatonic features; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality
disorder; brief psychotic disorder; schizophreniform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional
disorder; and other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders. Medical conditions and substance use can present with a combination of psy­
chotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychotic disorder due to another medical condition
needs to be excluded. Distinguishing schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia and
from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features is often difficult. Criterion
C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and Criterion B is
designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder
with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished
from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features due to the presence of prom­
inent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood
episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorders with psychotic features, the psy­
chotic features primarily occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative propor­
tion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis
may change from and to schizoaffective disorder (e.g., a diagnosis of schizoaffective dis­
order for a severe and prominent major depressive episode lasting 3 months during the
first 6 months of a persistent psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active
psychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several years without a recurrence
of another mood episode).
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Other medical conditions and
substance use can manifest with a combination of psychotic and mood symptoms, and
thus psychotic disorder due to another medical condition needs to be excluded.
Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders. Distinguishing schizoaffective dis­
order from schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic fea­
tures is often difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from
schizophrenia, and Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a
depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective
disorder can be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
based on the presence of prominent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in
the absence of a major mood episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features, the psychotic features primarily occur during the mood episode(s). Be­
cause the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the
appropriate diagnosis may change from and to schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and prominent major depressive episode
lasting 3 months during the first 6 months of a chronic psychotic illness would be changed
to schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several
years without a recurrence of another mood episode.)

Comorbidity
Many individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder are also diagnosed with other
mental disorders, especially substance use disorders and anxiety disorders. Similarly, the
incidence of medical conditions is increased above base rate for the general population
and leads to decreased life expectancy.


                              Substance/Medication-Induced
                                         Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:
   1. Delusions.
   2. Hallucinations.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
   (1)and (2):
   1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
      or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
   2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite­
      rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder that is not substance/
   medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent psychotic disorder could in­
   clude the following:
       The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
       persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of
       acute withdrawal or severe intoxication: or there is other evidence of an indepen­
       dent non-substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder (e.g., a history of recur­
       rent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CIVI codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced psychotic disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present
for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the sub­
stance-induced psychotic disorder, the 4th position character is “1 and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced psychotic disorder
(e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced psychotic disorder”). If a moderate or
severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced psychotic disor­
der, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance]
use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the co­
morbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after
a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the cli­
nician should record only the substance-induced psychotic disorder.

                                                                 ICD-10-CM

                                                                 With use
                                                   With use      disorder,       Without
                                                   disorder,     moderate           use
                                   ICD-9-CM          mild        or severe       disorder
 Alcohol                             291.9         F10.159       FI 0.259       FI 0.959
 Cannabis                            292.9         F12.159       FI 2.259       FI 2.959
 Phencyclidine                       292.9         F16.159       FI 6.259       FI 6.959
 Other hallucinogen                  292.9         FI 6.159      FI 6.259       FI 6.959
 Inhalant                            292.9         F18.159       FI 8.259       FI 8.959
 Sedative, hypnotic, or              292.9         FI 3.159      FI 3.259       FI 3.959
 anxiolytic
 Amphetamine (or other               292.9         FI 5.159      FI 5.259       FI 5.959
 stimulant)
 Cocaine                             292.9         F14.159       FI 4.259       FI 4.959
 Other (or unknown) substance        292.9         FI 9.159      FI 9.259       FI 9.959

Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for diag­
noses associated with substance class):
   With onset during intoxication: If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub­
   stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
   With onset during withdrawal: If the criteria are met for withdrawal from the sub­
   stance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative
   symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe
   in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and
   severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chap­
   ter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can be made
   without using this severity specifier.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the delusions or hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of
the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for ''other substance" should be used; and in
cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of sub­
stance is unknown, the category "unknown substance" should be used.
    The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in­
toxication, onset during withdrawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-IO-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxication in a man with a severe co­
caine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.9 cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset
during intoxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also
given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development
of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.9 cannabis-induced psy­
chotic disorder with onset during intoxication, with severe cannabis use disorder; 292.9
phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication, with mild
phencyclidine use disorder).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the delusions or hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid
substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexa­
methasone), the code for "other substance" with no comorbid substance use should be
used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category "unknown substance" with no comorbid sub­
stance use should be used.
     When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word "with," followed by the name of the substance-induced
psychotic disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication,
onset during withdrawal). For example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxi­
cation in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.259 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication. A
separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the sub­
stance-induced psychotic disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder
(e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disor­
der is noted (e.g., F16.959 phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during in­
toxication). When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the
development of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F12.259 severe
cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intox­
ication; F16.159 mild phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic
disorder, with onset during intoxication).

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder are prominent
delusions and/or hallucinations (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the physiolog­
ical effects of a substance/medication (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin expo­
sure) (Criterion B). Hallucinations that the individual realizes are substance/medication-
induced are not included here and instead would be diagnosed as substance intoxication
or substance withdrawal with the accompanying specifier "with perceptual disturbances"
(applies to alcohpl withdrawal; cannabis intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal; and stimulant intoxication).
    A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is distinguished from a primary
psychotic disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse,
there must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorders arise during or soon after exposure to a medication or after substance intoxica­
tion or withdrawal but can persist for weeks, whereas primary psychotic disorders may
precede the onset of substance/medication use or may occur during times of sustained ab­
stinence. Once initiated, the psychotic symptoms may continue as long as the substance/
medication use continues. Another consideration is the presence of features that are atyp­
ical of a primary psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the
appearance of delusions de novo in a person older than 35 years without a known history
of a primary psychotic disorder should suggest the possibility of a substance/medication-
induced psychotic disorder. Even a prior history of a primary psychotic disorder does not
rule out the possibility of a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. In contrast,
factors that suggest that the psychotic symptoms are better accounted for by a primary
psychotic disorder include persistence of psychotic symptoms for a substantial period of
time (i.e., a month or more) after the end of substance intoxication or acute substance with­
drawal or after cessation of medication use; or a history of prior recurrent primary psy­
chotic disorders. Other causes of psychotic symptoms must be considered even in an
individual with substance intoxication or withdrawal, because substance use problems are
not uncommon among individuals with non-substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorders.
    In addition to the four symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit­
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy­
chotic disorders.

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Psychotic disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; cannabis; hallucinogens, including phencyclidine and related sub­
stances; inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Psychotic disorders can occur in association with with­
drawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxio­
lytics; and other (or unknown) substances.
    Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics
and analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive
and cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medica­
tions, chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine, procarbazine), corticosteroids, gastro­
intestinal medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications,
other over-the-counter medications (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine), antidepres­
sant medication, and disulfiram. Toxins reported to induce psychotic symptoms include
anticholinesterase, organophosphate insecticides, sarin and other nerve gases, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, and volatile substances such as fuel or paint.

Prevaience
Prevalence of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder in the general popula­
tion is unknown. Between 7% and 25% of individuals presenting with a first episode of
psychosis in different settings are reported to have substance/medication-induced psy­
chotic disorder.
Development and Course
The initiation of the disorder may vary considerably with the substance. For example,
smoking a high dose of cocaine may produce psychosis within minutes, whereas days or
weeks of high-dose alcohol or sedative use may be required to produce psychosis. Alco­
hol-induced psychotic disorder, with hallucinations, usually occurs only after prolonged,
heavy ingestion of alcohol in individuals who have moderate to severe alcohol use disorder,
and the hallucinations are generally auditory in nature.
   Psychotic disorders induced by amphetamine and cocaine share similar clinical fea­
tures. Persecutory delusions may rapidly develop shortly after use of amphetamine or a
similarly acting sympathomimetic. The hallucination of bugs or vermin crawling in or un­
der the skin (formication) can lead to scratching and extensive skin excoriations. Cannabis-
induced psychotic disorder may develop shortly after high-dose cannabis use and usually
involves persecutory delusions, marked anxiety, emotional lability, and depersonalization.
The disorder usually remits within a day but in some cases may persist for a few days.
    Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder may at times persist when the offend­
ing agent is removed, such that it may be difficult initially to distinguish it from an indepen­
dent psychotic disorder. Agents such as amphetamines, phencyclidine, and cocaine have been
reported to evoke temporary psychotic states that can sometimes persist for weeks or longer
despite removal of the agent and treatment with neuroleptic medication. In later life, poly­
pharmacy for medical conditions and exposure to medications for parkinsonism, cardiovas­
cular disease, and other medical disorders may be associated with a greater likelihood of
psychosis induced by prescription medications as opposed to substances of abuse.

Diagnostic iVlarlcers
With substances for which relevant blood levels are available (e.g., blood alcohol level,
other quantifiable blood levels such as digoxin), the presence of a level consistent with tox­
icity may increase diagnostic certainty.

Functionai Consequences of
Substance/iVledication-induced Psycliotic Disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is typically severely disabling and
consequently is observed most frequently in emergency rooms, as individuals are often
brought to the acute-care setting when it occurs. However, the disability is typically self­
limited and resolves upon removal of the offending agent.

Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal. Individuals intoxicated with stimu­
lants, cannabis, the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alco­
hol or sedatives, may experience altered perceptions that they recognize as drug effects. If
reality testing for these experiences remains intact (i.e., the individual recognizes that the
perception is substance induced and neither believes in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is not
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal, with perceptual disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxica­
tion, with perceptual disturbances). "Flashback" hallucinations that can occur long after
the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic symptoms occur exclusively during
the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms
are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed sepa­
rately. Delusions in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive disorder would be di­
agnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
Primary psychotic disorder. A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is
distinguished from a primary psychotic disorder, such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorder, or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the
symptoms.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. A substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental or medical condition must
have its onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if
there is a withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with
medical conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must con­
sider the possibility that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological conse­
quences of the medical condition rather than the medication, in which case psychotic
disorder due to another medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the
primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical con­
dition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine em­
pirically for that individual whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician
has ascertained that the disturbance is attributable to both a medical condition and sub­
stance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) may be given.


                                          Psychotic Disorder
                            Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
   disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condi­
   tion.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Code based on predominant symptom:
   293.81 (F06.2) With delusions: If delusions are the predominant symptom.
   293.82 (F06.0) With hallucinations: If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 293.81 [F06.2] psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with de­
lusions). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately
before the psychotic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 162.9 [C34.90] malignant
lung neoplasm; 293.81 [F06.2] psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with
delusions).
Specify current severity:
   Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
   including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative
   symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe
   in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and
   severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chap­
   ter “Assessment Measures.”)
   Note: Diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition can be made
   without using this severity specifier.


Specifiers
In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assess­
ment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders.

Diagnostic Features
The essential features of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are promi­
nent delusions or hallucinations that are judged to be attributable to the physiological ef­
fects of another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
(e.g., the symptoms are not a psychologically mediated response to a severe medical con­
dition, in which case a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder, with marked stressor, would
be appropriate).
     Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality (i.e., visual, olfactory, gustatory, tac­
tile, or auditory), but certain etiological factors are likely to evoke specific hallucinatory
phenomena. Olfactory hallucinations are suggestive of temporal lobe epilepsy. Hallucina­
tions may vary from simple and unformed to highly complex and organized, depending
on etiological and environmental factors. Psychotic disorder due to another medical con­
dition is generally not diagnosed if the individual maintains reality testing for the hallu­
cinations and appreciates that they result from the medical condition. Delusions may have
a variety of themes, including somatic, grandiose, religious, and, most commonly, perse­
cutory. On the whole, however, associations between delusions and particular medical
conditions appear to be less specific than is the case for hallucinations.
     In determining whether the psychotic disturbance is attributable to another medical
condition, the presence of a medical condition must be identified and considered to be the
etiology of the psychosis through a physiological mechanism. Although there are no
infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the psychotic distur­
bance and the medical condition is etiological, several considerations provide some guidance.
One consideration is the presence of a temporal association between the onset, exacerba­
tion, or remission of the medical condition and that of the psychotic disturbance. A second
consideration is the presence of features that are atypical for a psychotic disorder (e.g.,
atypical age at onset or presence of visual or olfactory hallucinations). The disturbance must
also be distinguished from a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or an­
other mental disorder (e.g., an adjustment disorder).

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The temporal association of the onset or exacerbation of the medical condition offers the
greatest diagnostic certainty that the delusions or hallucinations are attributable to a med­
ical condition. Additional factors may include concomitant treatments for the underlying
medical condition that confer a risk for psychosis independently, such as steroid treatment
for autoimmune disorders.

Prevalence
Prevalence rates for psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are difficult to es­
timate given the wide variety of underlying medical etiologies. Lifetime prevalence has
been estimated to range from 0.21% to 0.54%. When the prevalence findings are stratified
by age group, individuals older than 65 years have a significantly greater prevalence of
0.74% compared with those in younger age groups. Rates of psychosis also vary according
to the underlying medical condition; conditions most commonly associated with psy­
chosis include untreated endocrine and metabolic disorders, autoimmune disorders (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor autoimmune en­
cephalitis), or temporal lobe epilepsy. Psychosis due to epilepsy has been further differ­
entiated into ictal, postictal, and interictal psychosis. The most common of these is postictal
psychosis, observed in 2%-7.8% of epilepsy patients. Among older individuals, there may
be a higher prevalence of the disorder in females, although additional gender-related fea­
tures are not clear and vary considerably with the gender distributions of the underlying
medical conditions.

Development and Course
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition may be a single transient state or it
may be recurrent, cycling with exacerbations and remissions of the underlying medical
condition. Although treatment of the underlying medical condition often results in a res­
olution of the psychosis, this is not always the case, and psychotic symptoms may persist
long after the medical event (e.g., psychotic disorder due to focal brain injury). In the con­
text of chronic conditions such as multiple sclerosis or chronic interictal psychosis of epi­
lepsy, the psychosis may assume a long-term course.
    The expression of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition does not differ
substantially in phenomenology depending on age at occurrence. However, older age
groups have a higher prevalence of the disorder, which is most likely due to the increasing
medical burden associated with advanced age and the cumulative effects of deleterious
exposures and age-related processes (e.g., atherosclerosis). The nature of the underlying
medical conditions is likely to change across the lifespan, with younger age groups more
affected by epilepsy, head trauma, autoimmune, and neoplastic diseases of early to mid­
life, and older age groups more affected by stroke disease, anoxic events, and multiple sys­
tem comorbidities. Underlying factors with increasing age, such as preexisting cognitive
impairment as well as vision and hearing impairments, may incur a greater risk for psy­
chosis, possibly by serving to lower the threshold for experiencing psychosis.

Risk and Prognostic Factors
Course modifiers. Identification and treatment of the underlying medical condition has
the greatest impact on course, although preexisting central nervous system injury may
confer a worse course outcome (e.g., head trauma, cerebrovascular disease).

Diagnostic iVlarlcers
The diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition depends on the clin­
ical condition of each individual, and the diagnostic tests will vary according to that con­
dition. A variety of medical conditions may cause psychotic symptoms. These include
neurological conditions (e.g., neoplasms, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington's disease,
multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, auditory or visual nerve injury or impairment, deafness,
migraine, central nervous system infections), endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypo­
thyroidism, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism, hyper- and hypoadrenocorticism), metabolic
conditions (e.g., hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia), fluid or electrolyte imbalances,
hepatic or renal diseases, and autoimmune disorders with central nervous system involve­
ment (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). The associated physical examination findings,
laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence or onset reflect the etiological medical
condition.
Suicide Risl(
Suicide risk in the context of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is not
clearly delineated, although certain conditions such as epilepsy and multiple sclerosis are
associated with increased rates of suicide, which may be further increased in the presence
of psychosis.

Functional Consequences of Psycliotic Disorder
Due to Another IVIedical Condition
Functional disability is typically severe in the context of psychotic disorder due to another
medical condition but will vary considerably by the type of condition and likely improve
with successful resolution of the condition.

Differential Diagnosis
Delirium. Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in the context of a delirium;
however, a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is
not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. Delusions
in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive disorder would be diagnosed as major or
mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. If there is evidence of recent or
prolonged substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal
from a substance, or exposure to a toxin (e.g., LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxica­
tion, alcohol withdrawal), a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be
considered. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks) of substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a sub­
stance-induced psychotic disorder, depending on the character, duration, or amount of
the substance used. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a
medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to an­
other medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be
given.
Psychotic disorder. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distin­
guished from a psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, delusional disorder, schizoaffective
disorder) or a depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. In psychotic disor­
ders and in depressive or bipolar disorders, with psychotic features, no specific and direct
causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be demon­
strated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history of schizophrenia
or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagno­
sis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that
involve voices speaking complex sentences are more characteristic of schizophrenia than
of psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. Other types of hallucinations (e.g., vi­
sual, olfactory) commonly signal a psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or
a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.

Comorbidity
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition in individuals older than 80 years is
associated with concurrent major neurocognitive disorder (dementia).
                                   Catatonia
Catatonia can occur in the context of several disorders, including neurodevelopmental,
psychotic, bipolar, depressive disorders, and other medical conditions (e.g., cerebral folate
deficiency, rare autoimmune and paraneoplastic disorders. The manual does not treat
catatonia as an independent class but recognizes a) catatonia associated with another men­
tal disorder (i.e., a neurodevelopmental, psychotic disorder, a bipolar disorder, a depres­
sive disorder, or other mental disorder), b) catatonic disorder due to another medical
condition, and c) unspecified catatonia.
    Catatonia is defined by the presence of three or more of 12 psychomotor features in the
diagnostic criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder and catatonic dis­
order due to another medical condition. The essential feature of catatonia is a marked psy­
chomotor disturbance that may involve decreased motor activity, decreased engagement
during interview or physical examination, or excessive and peculiar motor activity. The
clinical presentation of catatonia can be puzzling, as the psychomotor disturbance may
range from marked unresponsiveness to marked agitation. Motoric immobility may be se­
vere (stupor) or moderate (catalepsy and waxy flexibility). Similarly, decreased engage­
ment may be severe (mutism) or moderate (negativism). Excessive and peculiar motor
behaviors can be complex (e.g., stereotypy) or simple (agitation) and may include echola-
lia and echopraxia. In extreme cases, the same individual may wax and wane between de­
creased and excessive motor activity. The seemingly opposing clinical features and
variable manifestations of the diagnosis contribute to a lack of awareness and decreased
recognition of catatonia. During severe stages of catatonia, the individual may need care­
ful supervision to avoid self-harm or harming others. There are potential risks from mal­
nutrition, exhaustion, hyperpyrexia and self-inflicted injury.


                      Catatonia Associated With Another
                     Mental Disorder (Catatonia Specifier)
                                                                        293.89 (F06.1)

A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
     1.   Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
     2.   Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
     3.   Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
     4.   Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [exclude if known aphasia]).
     5.   Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
     6.   Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
     7.   Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
     8.   Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements).
     9.   Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
    10.   Grimacing.
    11.   Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
    12.   Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
Coding note: Indicate the name of the associated mental disorder when recording the
name of the condition (i.e., 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with major depressive dis­
order). Code first the associated mental disorder (e.g., neurodevelopmental disorder, brief
psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder,
bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, or other mental disorder) (e.g., 295.70 [F25.1]
schizoaffective disorder, depressive type; 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with
schizoaffective disorder).


Diagnostic Features
Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier) may be used when
criteria are met for catatonia during the course of a neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipo­
lar, depressive, or other mental disorder. The catatonia specifier is appropriate when the
clinical picture is characterized by marked psychomotor disturbance and involves at least
three of the 12 diagnostic features listed in Criterion A. Catatonia is typically diagnosed in
an inpatient setting and occurs in up to 35% of individuals with schizophrenia, but the ma­
jority of catatonia cases involve individuals with depressive or bipolar disorders. Before
the catatonia specifier is used in neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive, or
other mental disorders, a wide variety of other medical conditions need to be ruled out;
these conditions include, but are not limited to, medical conditions due to infectious, met­
abolic, or neurological conditions (see '"Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Con­
dition"). Catatonia can also be a side effect of a medication (see the chapter "Medication-
Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication"). Because of the
seriousness of the complications, particular attention should be paid to the possibility that
the catatonia is attributable to 333.92 (G21.0) neuroleptic malignant syndrome.


                                         Catatonic Disorder Due to
                                         Another IVIedical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria                                                       293.89 (F06.1)
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
     1.   Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
     2.   Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
     3.   Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
     4.   Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [Note: not applicable if there is an
          established aphasia]).
     5.   Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
     6.   Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
     7.   Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
     8.   Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements).
     9.   Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
    10.   Grimacing.
    11.   Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
    12.   Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
   disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., a manic episode).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: Include the name of the medical condition in the name of the mental disor­
der (e.g., 293.89 [F06.1]) catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the cata­
tonic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 572.2 [K71.90] hepatic encephalopathy;
293.89 [F06.1] catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy).


Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is the presence
of catatonia that is judged to be attributed to the physiological effects of another medical
condition. Catatonia can be diagnosed by the presence of at least three of the 12 clinical fea­
tures in Criterion A. There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings that the catatonia is attributable to another medical condition (Crite­
rion B). The diagnosis is not given if the catatonia is better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., manic episode) (Criterion C) or if it occurs exclusively during the course of
a delirium (Criterion D).

Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A variety of medical conditions may cause catatonia, especially neurological conditions
(e.g., neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease, encephalitis) and metabolic con­
ditions (e.g., hypercalcemia, hepatic encephalopathy, homocystinuria, diabetic ketoacido­
sis). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of
prevalence and onset reflect those of the etiological medical condition.

Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is not given if
the catatonia occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium or neuroleptic malignant
syndrome. If the individual is currently taking neuroleptic medication, consideration
should be given to medication-induced movement disorders (e.g., abnormal positioning
may be due to neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia) or neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(e.g., catatonic-like features may be present, along with associated vital sign and/or labo­
ratory abnormalities). Catatonic symptoms may be present in any of the following five
psychotic disorders: brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder, and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. It may
also be present in some of the neurodevelopmental disorders, in all of the bipolar and de­
pressive disorders, and in other mental disorders.


                                                  Unspecified Catatonia

This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of catatonia
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other impor­
tant areas of functioning but either the nature of the underlying mental disorder or other
medical condition is unclear, full criteria for catatonia are not met, or there is insufficient
information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Coding note: Code first 781.99 (R29.818) other symptoms involving nervous and muscu­
loskeletal systems, followed by 293.89 (F06.1) unspecified catatonia.
    Other Specified Schizophrenia Spectrum and
                       Other Psychotic Disorder
                                                                             298.8 (F28)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a schizophre­
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or im­
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The other specified schizophrenia spectrum and oth­
er psychotic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to com­
municate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any
specific schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder. This is done by recording “oth­
er specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder” followed by the specific
reason (e.g., “persistent auditory hallucinations”).
    Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1. Persistent auditory liallucinations occurring in the absence of any other features.
2. Deiusions with significant overlapping mood episodes: This includes persistent
    delusions with periods of overlapping mood episodes that are present for a substantial
    portion of the delusional disturbance (such that the criterion stipulating only brief mood
    disturbance in delusional disorder is not met).
3. Attenuated psychiosis syndrome: This syndrome is characterized by psychotic-like
    symptoms that are below a threshold for full psychosis (e.g., the symptoms are less
    severe and more transient, and insight is relatively maintained).
4. Deiusionai symptoms in partner of individuai witii deiusionai disorder: In the
    context of a relationship, the delusional material from the dominant partner provides
    content for delusional belief by the individual who may not othenwise entirely meet cri­
    teria for delusional disorder.



            Unspecified Schizophrenia Spectrum and
                           Other Psychotic Disorder
                                                                             298.9 (F29)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a schizophre­
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or im­
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum and oth­
er psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and oth­
er psychotic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to
specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient informa­
tion to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
                                        ^ ~ Bipolar and
                                        Related Disorders
B i p o l s r S n d rG lâ te d disorders are separated from the depressive disorders in
DSM-5 and placed between the chapters on schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders and depressive disorders in recognition of their place as a bridge between the
two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomatology, family history, and genetics. The di­
agnoses included in this chapter are bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic
disorder, substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder, bipolar and relat­
ed disorder due to another medical condition, other specified bipolar and related disor­
der, and unspecified bipolar and related disorder.
    The bipolar I disorder criteria represent the modern understanding of the classic
manic-depressive disorder or affective psychosis described in the nineteenth century, dif­
fering from that classic description only to the extent that neither psychosis nor the lifetime
experience of a major depressive episode is a requirement. However, the vast majority of
individuals whose symptoms meet the criteria for a fully syndromal manic episode also
experience major depressive episodes during the course of their lives.
    Bipolar II disorder, requiring the lifetime experience of at least one episode of major de­
pression and at least one hypomanie episode, is no longer thought to be a "milder" condition
than bipolar I disorder, largely because of the amount of time individuals with this con­
dition spend in depression and because the instability of mood experienced by individuals
with bipolar II disorder is typically accompanied by serious impairment in work and social
functioning.
    The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is given to adults who experience at least 2 years
(for children, a full year) of both hypomanie and depressive periods without ever fulfilling
the criteria for an episode of mania, hypomania, or major depression.
    A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several
medical conditions can be associated with manic-like phenomena. This fact is recognized
in the diagnoses of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and bipo­
lar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
    The recognition that many individuals, particularly children and, to a lesser extent, ad­
olescents, experience bipolar-like phenomena that do not meet the criteria for bipolar I, bi­
polar II, or cyclothymic disorder is reflected in the availability of the other specified
bipolar and related disorder category. Indeed, specific criteria for a disorder involving
short-duration hypomania are provided in Section III in the hope of encouraging further
study of this disorder.


                                                              Bipolar I Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
For a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, it is necessary to meet tlie following criteria for a manic
episode. The manic episode may have been preceded by and may be followed by hypo-
manic or major depressive episodes.
Manic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
   and abnormally and persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy, lasting at
   least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if hospi­
   talization is necessary).
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or
   more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) are present to a sig­
   nificant degree and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior:
   1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
   2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
   3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
   4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
   5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
      stimuli), as reported or observed.
   6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
      psychomotor agitation (i.e., puφoseless non-goal-directed activity).
   7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse­
      quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
      foolish business investments).
C. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in social or
   occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or oth­
   ers, or there are psychotic features.
D. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
   of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or to another medical condition.
    Note: A full manic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g., medi­
   cation, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond the
    physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a manic episode and,
   therefore, a bipolar I diagnosis.
Note: Criteria A-D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime manic episode is re­
quired for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Hypomanie Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
   and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 4 consec­
   utive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three (or
   more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) have persisted, rep­
   resent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant
   degree:
   1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
   2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
   3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
   4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
   5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
      stimuli), as reported or observed.
   6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
      psychomotor agitation.
   7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse­
      quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
      foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac­
   teristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa­
   tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
   episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
   of abuse, a medication, other treatment).
   Note: A full hypomanie episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
   medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond
   the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanie episode
   diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms (particularly in­
   creased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use) are not taken
   as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanie episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bi­
   polar diathesis.
Note: Criteria A-'F constitute a hypomanie episode. Hypomanie episodes are common in
bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
   period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
   is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
   Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical condi­
   tion.
   1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec­
      tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
      appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
   2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the
      day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
   3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
      5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every
      day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
   4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
   5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
      merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
   6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
   7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu­
      sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
   8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei­
      ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
   9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with­
      out a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa­
   tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
   medical condition.
Note: Criteria A-C constitute a major depressive episode. Major depressive episodes are
common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a
natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense
sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Cri­
terion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be un­
derstandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive
episode in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully
considered. This decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on
the individual’s history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context
of loss.^
Bipolar I Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one manic episode (Criteria A-D under “Manic Ep­
   isode” above).
B. The occurrence of the manic and major depressive episode(s) is not better explained
   by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional dis­
   order, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
   disorder.
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for bipolar I disorder is based on type of current or most recent epi­
sode and its status with respect to current severity, presence of psychotic features, and
remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full criteria
are currently met for a manic or major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are only
indicated if the full criteria are not currently met for a manic, hypomanie, or major depres­
sive episode. Codes are as follows:

                         Current or          Current or         Current or          Current or
                         most recent        most recent         most recent         most recent
                          episode             episode            episode             episode
 Bipolar 1disorder         manic            hypomanie*          depressed          unspecified**
 Mild (p. 154)              296.41                ΝΑ               296.51                NA
                           (F31.11)                               (F31.31)
 Moderate (p. 154)          296.42                ΝΑ               296.52                NA
                           (F31.12)                               (F31.32)
 Severe (p. 154)            296.43                ΝΑ               296.53                NA
                           (F31.13)                                (F31.4)




 ^In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in
  grief the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in MDE it is persistent
  depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is
  likely to decrease in intensity over days to Wfeeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of
  grief. These waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The
  depressed mood of a MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations.
  The pain of grief may be accompanied by positive emotions and humor that are uncharacteristic
  of the pervasive unhappiness and misery characteristic of a major depressive episode. The
  thought content associated with grief generally features a preoccupation with thoughts and
  memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical or pessimistic ruminations seen in a MDE.
  In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in a MDE, feelings of worthlessness and self­
  loathing are common. If self-derogatory ideation is present in grief, it typically involves per­
  ceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently enough, not telling the
  deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved individual thinks about death and dying,
  such thoughts are generally focused on the deceased and possibly about "joining" the deceased,
  whereas in a major depressive episode such thoughts are focused on ending one's own life
  because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
                         Current or           Current or         Current or          Current or
                         most recent         most recent         most recent        most recent
                          episode              episode            episode             episode
 Bipolar 1disorder         manic             hypomanie*          depressed          unspecified**
With psychotic              296.44                ΝΑ                296.54                NA
features***                 (F31.2)                                 (F31.5)
(p. 152)
 In partial                  296.45             296.45              296.55                NA
 remission (p. 154)         (F31.73)           (F31.73)            (F31.75)
 In full remission           296.46             296.46              296.56                 NA
 (p. 154)                   (F31.74)           (F31.74)            (F31.76)
 Unspecified                296.40              296.40              296.50                NA
                            (F31.9)             (F31.9)             (F31.9)
 Severity and psychotic specifiers do not apply; code 296.40 (F31.0) for cases not in remission.
  Severity, psychotic, and remission specifiers do not apply. Code 296.7 (F31.9).
***If psychotic features are present, code the "with psychotic features" specifier irrespective of epi­
sode severity.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar
I disorder, type of current or most recent episode, severity/psychotic/remission specifiers,
followed by as many specifiers without codes as apply to the current or most recent epi­
sode.
Specify.
   With    anxious distress (p. 149)
   With    mixed features (pp. 149-150)
   With    rapid cycling (pp. 150-151)
   With    meianchoiic features (p. 151)
   With    atypicai features (pp. 151-152)
   With    m ood-congruent psychotic features (p. 152)
   With    m ood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 152)
   With    catatonia (p. 152). Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
   With    péripartum onset (pp. 152-153)
   With    seasonal pattern (pp. 153-154)



Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a manic episode is a distinct period during which there is an ab­
normally, persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and persistently increased
activity or energy that is present for most of the day, nearly every day, for a period of at
least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary), accompanied by at least three
additional symptoms from Criterion B. If the mood is irritable rather than elevated or ex­
pansive, at least four Criterion B symptoms must be present.
    Mood in a manic episode is often described as euphoric, excessively cheerful, high, or
"feeling on top of the world." In some cases, the mood is of such a highly infectious quality
that it is easily recognized as excessive and may be characterized by unlimited and hap­
hazard enthusiasm for interpersonal, sexual, or occupational interactions. For example,
the individual may spontaneously start extensive conversations with strangers in public.
Often the predominant mood is irritable rather than elevated, particularly when the indi­
vidual's wishes are denied or if the individual has been using substances. Rapid shifts in
mood over brief periods of time may occur and are referred to as lability (i.e., the alterna-
tion among euphoria, dysphoria, and irritability). In children, happiness, silliness and
"goofiness" are normal in the context of special occasions; however, if these symptoms are
recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond what is expected for the developmen­
tal level of the child, they may meet Criterion A. If the happiness is unusual for a child (i.e.,
distinct from baseline), and the mood change occurs at the same time as symptoms that
meet Criterion B for mania, diagnostic certainty is increased; however, the mood change
must be accompanied by persistently increased activity or energy levels that are obvious
to those who know the child well.
     During the manic episode, the individual may engage in multiple overlapping new
projects. The projects are often initiated with little knowledge of the topic, and nothing seems
out of the individual's reach. The increased activity levels may manifest at unusual hours of
the day.
     Inflated self-esteem is typically present, ranging from uncritical self-confidence to marked
grandiosity, and may reach delusional proportions (Criterion Bl). Despite lack of any partic­
ular experience or talent, the individual may embark on complex tasks such as writing a novel
or seein g publicity for some impractical invention. Grandiose delusions (e.g., of having a
special relationship to a famous person) are common. In children, overestimation of abilities
and belief that, for example, they are the best at a sport or the smartest in the class is normal;
however, when such beliefs are present despite clear evidence to the contrary or the child at­
tempts feats that are clearly dangerous and, most important, represent a change from the
child's normal behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied.
     One of the most common features is a decreased need for sleep (Criterion B2) and is
distinct from insomnia in which the individual wants to sleep or feels the need to sleep but
is unable. The individual may sleep httle, if at all, or may awaken several hours earlier than
usual, feeling rested and full of energy. When the sleep disturbance is severe, the individ­
ual may go for days without sleep, yet not feel tired. Often a decreased need for sleep her­
alds the onset of a manic episode.
     Speech can be rapid, pressured, loud, and difficult to interrupt (Criterion B3). Individ­
uals may talk continuously and without regard for others' wishes to communicate, often
in an intrusive manner or without concern for the relevance of what is said. Speech is
sometimes characterized by jokes, puns, amusing irrelevancies, and theatricality, with
dramatic mannerisms, singing, and excessive gesturing. Loudness and forcefulness of
speech often become more important than what is conveyed. If the individual's mood is
more irritable than expansive, speech may be marked by complaints, hostile comments, or
angry tirades, particularly if attempts are made to interrupt the individual. Both Criterion
A and Criterion B symptoms may be accompanied by symptoms of the opposite (i.e., de­
pressive) pole (see "with mixed features" specifier, pp. 149-150).
     Often the individual's thoughts race at a rate faster than they can be expressed through
speech (Criterion B4). Frequently there is flight of ideas evidenced by a nearly continuous flow
of accelerated speech, with abrupt shifts from one topic to another. When flight of ideas is se­
vere, speech may become disorganized, incoherent, and particularly distressful to the individ­
ual. Sometimes thoughts are experienced as so crowded that it is very difficult to speak.
     Distractibility (Criterion B5) is evidenced by an inability to censor immaterial external
stimuli (e.g., the interviewer's attire, background noises or conversations, furnishings in
the room) and often prevents individuals experiencing mania from holding a rational con­
versation or attending to instructions.
     The increase in goal-directed activity often consists of excessive planning and partici­
pation in multiple activities, including sexual, occupational, political, or religious activi­
ties. Increased sexual drive, fantasies, and behavior are often present. Individuals in a manic
episode usually show increased sociability (e.g., renewing old acquaintances or calling or
contacting friends or even strangers), without regard to the intrusive, domineering, and
demanding nature of these interactions. They often display psychomotor agitation or rest­
lessness (i.e., purposeless activity) by pacing or by holding multiple conversations simulta­
